Nowcasting




Oxford Handbooks Online
    Nowcasting
    Marta BańBura, Domenico Giannone, and Lucrezia Reichlin
    The Oxford Handbook of Economic Forecasting
    Edited by Michael P. Clements and David F. Hendry

    Print Publication Date: Jul 2011
    Subject: Economics and Finance, Econometrics, Experimental and Quantitative Methods
    Online Publication Date: Sep 2012 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195398649.013.0008




Abstract and Keywords

This article presents a statistical framework for estimating the current state of the
economy (together with the recent past and near future) in a way in which the latest
releases of high-frequency economic data can be incorporated, and in a way in which the
impact of the latest release on the forecast can be readily assessed (providing a narrative
to the changes in the estimate/forecast over time as more information accrues). It is
organized as follows. Section 2 defines the problem of nowcasting in general and relates
it to the concept of news in macroeconomic data releases. Section 3 explains the details
of the approach. Section 4 discusses related literature. Section 5 illustrates the
characteristics of the model via an application to the nowcast of GDP and inflation in the
euro area. Section 6 discusses issues for further research, while Section 7 concludes.

Keywords: economic forecasting, macroeconomic data, GDP, inflation, euro area, current economic state




Page 1 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting




1. Introduction
Economists have imperfect knowledge of the present state of the economy and even of
the recent past. Many key statistics are released with a long delay and then subsequently
revised. As a consequence, unlike weather forecasters, who know what is the weather
today and only have to predict the weather tomorrow, economists have to forecast the
present and even the recent past. The problem of predicting the present, the very near
future, and the very recent past is called nowcasting and is the subject of this chapter.

Nowcasting is particularly relevant for those key macroeconomic variables that are
collected at low frequency, typically on a quarterly basis, and released with a substantial
lag. To obtain “early estimates” of such key economic indicators, nowcasters use the
information from data that are related to the target variable but collected at higher
frequency, typically monthly, and released in amore timely manner. One of the key
features of an effective nowcasting tool is the incorporation of the most up-to-date
information in an environment in which data are released in a nonsynchronous manner
and with varying publication lags.

For example, euro-area gross domestic product (GDP) is only available on a quarterly
basis and is released 6 weeks after the close of the quarter. In March 2010, for instance,
we only had information up to the last quarter of 2009 and needed to wait until mid-May
to obtain a first estimate of the first quarter of 2010. However, there are several
variables, available at monthly frequency and published with shorter delay, that can be
used to construct early estimates of GDP. For example, euro-area industrial production for
January is released in mid-March. These series measure directly certain components of
GDP and are considered to contain a strong signal on its short-term developments. Much
more timely information, albeit potentially (p. 194) less precise, is provided by various
surveys. They measure expectations of economic activity and are typically available
shortly before the end of the month to which they refer. Beyond industrial production and
surveys, many other data releases are likely to be informative on the state of the
economy, as is revealed by the fact that many are closely watched by financial markets,
which react whenever there are surprises about the value of the new data [for evidence
on this point, see Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989)].

While, in this chapter, we concentrate the discussion around GDP, the ideas developed
here can be applied to nowcasting any low-frequency variable released with a substantial
delay for which we can exploit more timely, higher-frequency information. The emphasis
on GDP is justified by the fact that this is the key statistic describing the state of the
economy. In policy institutions, and in particular in central banks, its nowcast is closely
monitored and frequently updated to incorporate the information from latest data
releases (see e.g., ECB 2008; Bundesbank 2009). Further, the nowcast is used as an input




Page 2 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

for the more general forecasting process, which is concerned with longer horizons and is
often conducted on the basis of large structural models.

Until recently, nowcasting had received very little attention in the academic literature,
although it is routinely conducted in policy institutions either through a judgemental
process or on the basis of simple models. Among these simple models are the so-called
bridge equations, which relate GDP to quarterly aggregates of one or a few monthly
series.

Although the bridge between monthly and quarterly variables is an essential component
of nowcasting, as monthly data are more timely than quarterly and are released more
often, nowcasting ideally requires more complex modeling than what is offered by bridge
equations. This is because it not only requires updating the estimates of the target
quarterly variable as new data become available throughout the quarter, but also requires
commenting and interpreting the sequence of revisions of those estimates. Not only do
we want to know by how much the GDP nowcast has been revised, but also what explains
the revision—is it, for example, due to higher than expected readings of industrial
production or surveys or both, and what weighs the most? In other words, we are
interested in relating the part of the monthly release that was previously unexpected, the
news, to the revisions of GDP estimates. For this kind of analysis we need to model the
joint dynamics of the monthly input data and the quarterly target variable in a unified
framework.

Two seminal papers (Evans 2005; Giannone, Reichlin, and Small 2008) have formalized
this process in statistical models. Both approaches model, within the same statistical
framework, the joint dynamics of GDP and the monthly data, and propose solutions for
estimation when data have missing observations at the end of the sample due to
nonsynchronized publication lags (the so-called jagged/ragged edge problem).1

         The model used in this chapter is based on Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008),
  (p. 195)

but we also rely on several extensions due to Bańbura and Modugno (2010). The general
framework is a factor model a la Forni et al. (2000) and Stock and Watson (2002a), but
the estimation method is quasi maximum likelihood, as in Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin
(2006a).

The methodology of Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008) has a number of desirable
features and, in particular, it offers a parsimonious solution for the inclusion of a rich
information set. Data that are typically watched and commented on throughout a quarter
are at least a dozen, but this number can be higher. The model was first implemented at
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve in a project that started in 2003 and then
at the European Central Bank (ECB 2008). The methodology has also been implemented
in other central banks for other economies, including various euro area countries
(D'Agostino, McQuinn, O'Brieu 2008; Rünstler et al. 2009), New Zealand (Matheson
2010), and Norway (Aastveit and Trovik 2008).



Page 3 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Two results that have emerged from the empirical literature suggest that nowcasting has
an important place in the broader forecasting literature. First, Giannone, Reichlin, and
Small (2008) show that gains of institutional and statistical forecasts of GDP relative to
the naïve constant growth model are substantial only at very short horizons and, in
particular, for the current quarter. This implies that our ability to forecast GDP growth
mostly concerns the current (and previous) quarter. Second, Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala
(2004) show that the automatic statistical procedure in Giannone, Reichlin, and Small
(2008) performs as well as the nowcast published in the Greenbooks, which is the result
of a complex process involving models and judgement. For the euro area, similar results
are obtained in Angelini et al. (2008).

Another robust empirical result coming from this work is that the timeliness of data
matters; that is, the exploitation of early releases leads to improvement in the nowcast
accuracy. In particular, the literature shows that surveys, which provide the most timely
information, contribute to an improvement of the estimate early in the quarter, but by the
time hard information, such as industrial production, becomes available later in the
quarter, their contribution vanishes (Angelini et al. 2008; Bańbura and Rünstler 2011;
Giannone, Reichlin, and Small 2008; Matheson 2010).

We should stress that related to nowcasting is the literature on coincident indicators of
economic activity where, rather than focusing on an early estimate of GDP, an unobserved
state of the economy is estimated from a multivariate model. Although some of the
problems in this literature are related to those described above for nowcasting, in this
chapter we do not review this literature in much detail and limit the discussion to pure
nowcasting defined as timely estimation and analysis of a particular target variable such
as GDP.

The chapter is organized as follows. The second section defines the problem of
nowcasting in general and relates it to the concept of news in macroeconomic data
releases, briefly described above. In the third section we explain the details of our
approach. In section 4 we discuss related literature. In section 5 we illustrate the (p. 196)
characteristics of the model via an application to the nowcast of GDP and inflation in the
euro area. Section 6 discusses issues for further research. Section 7 concludes.




2. The Problem
Before referring to a particular model, let us define formally the general problem of
producing a nowcast and its updates, which arise as the result of an inflow of new
information.

To fix ideas we will illustrate the problem on an example of the GDP nowcast. As
mentioned in the introduction, GDP is released only 6 weeks after the close of the



Page 4 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

reference quarter. In the meantime it can be estimated using higher-frequency, e.g.
monthly, variables that are published in a more timely manner.

To describe the problem more formally, let us denote by Ωv data available at time v, where
v refers to the date of a particular data release. Further, let us denote GDP growth at time
t as . We define the problem of nowcasting        as the orthogonal projection of  on the
available information set Ωv: (1)



where         refers to the conditional expectation. One of the elements that distinguishes
nowcasting from other forecast applications is the structure of the information set Ωv.
One particular feature is typically referred to as its “ragged” or “jagged edge.” It means
that, since data are released in a nonsynchronous manner and with different degrees of
delay, the time of the last available observation differs from series to series. Another
feature is that it contains mixed-frequency series, in our case monthly and quarterly.
Hence we will have                                                                                , where Ti,v
denotes the period corresponding to the latest available observation of series i at time v.2
Because of the nonsynchronicity of data releases, Ti,v is not the same across variables and
therefore the data set exhibits the previously mentioned jagged edge.

Hence the problem of nowcasting needs to be analyzed in a framework that imposes a
plausible probability structure on Ωv and can efficiently exploit all the relevant
information from such an information set, where, in particular, the number of potential
monthly predictors, xi,t, could be large.

Another important feature of the nowcasting process is that one rarely performs a single
projection for a quarter of interest, but rather a sequence of nowcasts which are updated
as new data arrive. The first nowcasts are usually made with very little or no information
on the reference quarter. With subsequent data releases they are (p. 197) revised, leading
to more precise projections as the information on the period of interest accrues. In other
words, we will, in general, perform a sequence of projections:                                                 , where
v, v + 1, …, refer to dates of consecutive data releases. Typically the intervals between
two consecutive data releases are short (possibly couple of days or less) and change over
time. Consequently v has high frequency and is irregularly spaced.

We now explain why and how the nowcast is updated and introduce the concept of news,
which is central to understanding the nowcast revisions.

Let us first analyze the difference between the two information sets Ωv and Ωv+1. At time
v+1 we have a release of a certain group of variables,                                         , and consequently
the information set expands.3 The new information set differs from the preceding one for
two reasons. First, it contains new, more recent figures. Second, old data might get
revised. In what follows, we will abstract from the problem of data revisions. Therefore
we have Ωv ⊆ Ωv+1 and                                            .


Page 5 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Given the “expanding” character of the information and the properties of orthogonal
projections, we can decompose the new forecast as (2)




where Iv+1 is the subset of the information set Ωv+1 whose elements are orthogonal to all
the elements of Ωv. Given the difference between Ωv and Ωv+1 specified above, we have
that



and                          , where Jv+1 denotes the number of elements in                        . Hence the only
element that leads to a change in the nowcast is the “unexpected” (with respect to the
model) part of the data release, Iv+1, which we label as the news. The concept of news is
useful because what matters in understanding the updating process of the nowcast is not
the release itself but the difference between that release and what had been forecast
before it. In particular, in an unlikely case that the released numbers are exactly as
predicted by the model, the nowcast will not be revised. On the other hand, we would
intuitively expect that for example, a negative news in industrial production should revise
the GDP forecasts downward. Below we show how this can be quantified.

It is worth noting that the news is not a standard Wold forecast error. First, the pattern of
data availability changes with time. Second, the news depends on the order in which new
data are released.

  (p. 198)     From the properties of the conditional expectation, we can further develop
equation (2) as (3)




In order to expand equation (3) further and to extract a meaningful model based news
component, one needs to have a model that can reliably account for the joint dynamic
relationships among the data. Given such a model and assuming that the data are
Gaussian, it turns out that we can find coefficients bj,t ,v+1 such that




In other words, we can express the forecast revision as a weighted sum of news from the
released variables: (4)




Hence, consistent with the intuition, the magnitude of the forecast revision depends on
the size of the news and on its relevance for the target variable as quantified by the
associated weight bj,t ,v+1.


Page 6 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

The decomposition of equation (4) enables us to trace the sources of forecast revisions
back to individual predictors. In the case of a simultaneous release of several (groups of)
variables it is possible to decompose the resulting forecast revision into contributions
from the news in individual (groups of) series, thus allowing commenting on the revision
of the target in relation to unexpected developments of the inputs. This decomposition is
also useful when the forecast is updated less frequently than at each new release (we
provide an illustration in the empirical section).




3. The econometric framework
To compute nowcasts, news, and its contributions to nowcast revisions all we need is, in
principle, to perform linear projections. In practice, we have to deal with several
problems including mixed frequency, jagged edge and possibly other cases of missing
data, and the curse of dimensionality due to the richness of the available information
which, if included, can lead to imprecise and volatile estimates.

In this chapter we follow the approach proposed by Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008)
who offer a solution to these problems by modeling the monthly data as a parametric
dynamic factor model cast in a state-space representation. Once we obtain the state-
space representation, Kalman filter techniques can be used to perform the projections, as
they automatically adapt to changing data availability. (p. 199) Importantly, the factor
model representation allows the inclusion of many variables, which is a desirable
characteristic since many releases might contain relevant information for the target
variable.

As for estimation, we adopt the approach of Bańbura and Modugno (2010), who estimate
the model by maximum likelihood. Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin (2006a) have shown that
the maximum likelihood approach is feasible and robust in the context of large-scale
factor models. It also allows us to take into account several important features of the
nowcasting process. The next subsections describe the model and the estimation in
detail.



3.1. Monthly factor model

We start by specifying the dynamics for the monthly data. How to include quarterly
variables within this framework is discussed in the next subsection.

Let xt = (x1,t,x2,t,…,xn,t)′ denote the monthly series, which have been transformed to
satisfy the assumption of stationarity. More precisely, xt are month-to-month growth rates
(or differences) of the original variables (see the appendix for details on the




Page 7 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

transformations applied). We assume that xt obeys the following factor model
representation: (5)


where ft is an r × 1 vector of (unobserved) common factors and εt is a vector of
idiosyncratic components. Λ denotes the factor loadings for the monthly variables. The
common factors and the idiosyncratic components are assumed to have mean zero, and
hence the constants μ = (μ1,μ2, …,μn)′ are the unconditional means. Further, the factors
are modeled as a vector autoregressive (VAR) process of order p: (6)


where A1, …,Ap are r × r matrices of autoregressive coefficients.

Finally, we assume that the idiosyncratic component of the monthly variables follows an
AR(1) process: (7)


with                for i ≠ j.

Taking explicitly into account the dynamics of the factors is particularly important in
nowcasting applications. The reason is that, due to publication delays, the information on
the most recent periods can be scarce and exploiting the dynamics, in addition to
contemporaneous relationships, can increase the precision of the factor estimates.

In contrast to models typically used in the context of nowcasting, we further restrict Λ, A1
,…, Ap, and Q. Specifically, we partition ft into mutually independent global, real, and
nominal factors. We assume that the global factor is loaded by all the (p. 200) variables
while real and nominal factors are specific to real and nominal variables, respectively.
Precisely, assuming (without loss of generality) that all the nominal variables are ordered
before the real, we have




where labels G, N, and R correspond to the global, nominal, and real factors, respectively.

This framework is used to account for the local cross-sectional correlation within the real
and nominal blocks, which is helpful for a more efficient extraction of the global factor.
This type of restriction is easily accommodated within the maximum likelihood approach
to estimation, as discussed below. This approach also allows implementation of other
structures, for example, more local factors for a finer grouping of the variables.

Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin (2006a) have shown that, for large cross sections, the model
given by equations (5) and (6) can be estimated by maximum likelihood under the
assumption of lack of serial and cross-sectional correlation in the idiosyncratic
component even if this condition is not satisfied by the data. However, this

Page 8 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

misspecification can cause problems in small samples, and consequently in nowcasting,
because of the incomplete cross-sections at the end of the sample. Explicit modeling of
serial correlation of the idiosyncratic component and including local factors attempts to
mitigate this problem.4



3.2. Modeling quarterly variables

We follow Mariano and Murasawa (2003) and incorporate quarterly variables into the
framework by constructing for each of them a partially observed monthly counterpart.

Lets us explain it on the example of GDP. In what follows we adopt the convention in
which the value of the quarterly variable is “assigned” to the third month of the
respective quarter. Accordingly, the quarterly level of GDP, which we denote by                                     ,t=
3,6,9,…, can be expressed as the sum of its unobserved monthly contributions,                                       :



Let us define                                and                      . We assume that the unobserved
monthly growth rate of GDP,                        , admits the same factor (p. 201) model
representation as the monthly real variables: (8)


(9)


with ΛQ = (ΛQ,G 0 ΛQ,R).

To link yt with the observedGDPdatawe construct a partially observed monthly series,




and use the approximation of Mariano and Murasawa (2003): (10)




3.3. Estimation and forecasting

Let us define                    and μ̄ = (μ′, μ̃Q)′ with μ̃Q = gμQ. The joint model specified by
equations (5)–(10) can be cast in a state-space representation: (11)




where the vector of states includes the common factors and the idiosyncratic
components. In the case p ≤ 5, we have



Page 9 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting



All the parameters of the model—μ̄, Λ, ΛQ, Λ1, …, Ap, Q, α1,…, αn, αQ, σ1, …, σn, σQ—are
collected in θ. The details of the state-space representation, and in particular the
structure of the matrices, Z(θ), T(θ), and Ση(θ), are provided in the appendix.5

In this chapter we estimate θ by maximum likelihood implemented by the expectation
maximization (EM) algorithm. This approach has been proposed for large data sets by
Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin (2006a) and extended by Bańbura and Modugno (2010) to
deal with missing observations and idiosyncratic dynamics. Giannone, Reichlin, and Small
(2008) use a different procedure involving two steps: first, the parameters of the model
are estimated using principal components as factor estimates; second, factors are
reestimated using the Kalman filter (see Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin 2006b). Roughly
speaking, the maximum likelihood estimation (p. 202) using the EM algorithm consists of
iterating the two-step approach: estimating the parameters conditional on the factor
estimates from the previous iteration and vice versa.

Maximum likelihood allows us to easily deal with such features of the model as a
substantial fraction of missing data, restrictions on the parameters, or serial correlation
of the idiosyncratic component. In addition, as we also study models of moderate sizes
(less than 30 variables), the maximum likelihood approach should be more efficient.
Finally, in this framework it is straightforward to introduce factors that are specific to a
subgroup of variables (see above). The details of the EM iterations, following Bańbura
and Modugno (2010), are given in the appendix.

Given an estimate of θ, the nowcasts as well as the estimates of the factors or of any
missing observations in x̄t can be obtained from the Kalman filter or smoother. Precisely,
under the assumption that the data-generating process is given by equation (11) with θ
equal to its quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimate, the Kalman filter or smoother can
be used to obtain, in an efficient and automatic manner, the projection of equation (1) for
any pattern of data availability in Ωv.6 One way to understand how the Kalman filter and
smoother deal with missing data is to imagine that they simply discard the rows in x̄t and
Z(θ) that correspond to the missing observations in the former vector (see, e.g., Durbin
and Koopman 2001).

In addition, the news Iv+1 and the expectations needed to compute bj,t ,v+1 in equation (4)
can be easily retrieved from the Kalman smoother output [see Bańbura and Modugno
(2010) for details]. It is worth noting that for t large enough so that the Kalman filter has
approached its steady state, the weights bj,t ,v+1 will not depend on a particular realization
of                   , but only on θ and on the shape of the jagged edge in Ωv and Ωv+1.




4. Related Literature

Page 10 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Our approach, as described in the previous section, relies on the assumption that the data
are driven by few unobservable factors. Recent applications of the factor model approach
are Angelini et al. (2008), Bańbura and Rünstler (2011), Camacho and Perez-Quiros
(2010), Marcellino and Schumacher (2010), and Rünstler et al. (2009), among others. The
model by Evans (2005) is similar in spirit and is based on the assumption that GDP is the
only unobservable factor.

A key feature of our modeling strategy is that it relies on a unified system of equations
that summarizes the joint dynamics of the target variable and the predictors. The
problems of jagged edge and mixed frequency are translated into a problem of missing
data. The latter can be dealt with efficiently through the application of the Kalman filter,
as the system has a state-space representation. These features enable us to obtain, for
any pattern of data availability, forecasts of (p. 203) all the variables, allowing for a
model-based interpretation of the nowcast updates in terms of news.

In this section we briefly review alternative modeling strategies that have been proposed
for nowcasting or related problems. The traditional approach to nowcasting, which has
been implemented at various central banks, is the bridge equation solution. It is a single-
equation framework in which the nowcast is obtained from a regression of the quarterly
target variable on its lags and on some monthly predictors. In order to retain parsimony
in the lag specification for the monthly variables, they are converted to the frequency of
the target variable, typically using equal weights. In case there is only partial monthly
information on a given quarter, auxiliary models—for each of the monthly predictors or
for their subgroups—are used to infill the “missing” months. Early applications of bridge
equations are Trehan (1989) and Parigi and Schlitzer (1995), and examples of more
recent applications are, Parigi and Golinelli (2007), and Rünstler and Sédillot (2003),
Diron (2008), Kitchen and Monaco (2003), among others.

More recently, in literature that does not focus on nowcasting, Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and
Valkanov (2004) proposed another solution to forecasting a low-frequency variable with
high-frequency predictors (see also the chapter by Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos in
this volume). It is also a single-equation approach, however, it does not require frequency
conversion, as it involves a parsimoniously parameterized distributed lag polynomial for
the high-frequency regressors. As a consequence, more distant lags can be included and
no auxiliary forecasting equations are necessary. On the other hand, model parameters
depend on forecast horizon and on the pattern of data availability. In the context of
nowcasting mixed-data sampling (MIDAS) has been applied by, for example, Clements
and Galvão (2008) and Marcellino and Schumacher (2010), who also evaluate it against
alternative approaches.

Single-equation approaches, described previously, are simple and can be quite effective.
In case of parameters instability, they can also be more robust compared to a system
solution. However, from the perspective of nowcast interpretation, they have an
important drawback, namely they do not produce a system-based forecast for all the
variables. This hinders a rigorous understanding of nowcast revisions in terms of news

Page 11 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

embedded in consecutive data releases. One way to get around this problem is proposed
by Ghysels and Wright (2009), who assess the effect of news on the updates of nowcasts
and forecasts by considering expectations from survey data and using auxiliary
regressions to link the survey-based news with revisions of the model forecast.

Let us turn to the problem of estimation. The approach followed here is based on the EM
algorithm for a dynamic factor model that can deal with a general pattern of missing
data. Stock and Watson (2002b) developed an algorithm based on the principle of the EM
for the extraction of principal components from panels with missing data and mixed
frequency. Their approach, however, is not well suited for news extraction and revision
interpretation because, when forecasting the missing observations, it only considers
cross-sectional dependence, while the (p. 204) time dependence is ignored. Schumacher
and Breitung (2008) apply the approach of Stock and Watson (2002b) to nowcast German
GDP from monthly data and forecast the periods for which no (or no sufficient) data are
available via an auxiliary forecasting model (VAR) for the factors.

As regards including data sampled at mixed frequencies into a state-space
representation, the approximation for the growth rates of Mariano and Murasawa (2003)7
results in a linear model, but implies that the monthly interpolations of the levels are
inconsistent with the quarterly totals. In the context of nowcasting, this approach has
been used by Angelini et al. (2008) and Bańbura and Modugno (2010), among others.
Mitchell et al. (2005) and Proietti (2008) propose alternative approaches that do not use
the approximation of equation (10) and ensure that the sum of estimates of the monthly
levels of GDP is consistent with the observed quarterly figure.

Regarding the literature on coincident indicators of economic activity, a classic paper in
this field is Stock and Watson (1989). More recently, new ideas on how to construct these
indicators have led to the Eurocoin index for the euro area (Altissimo et al. 2001, 2006)
and the Chicago Fed index for the United States (Chicago FED, 2001). Aruoba, Diebold,
and Scotti (2009) post a similar index, which is based also on weekly data, on the
Philadelphia Fed Web site. It is worth noting that the former two papers adopt a different
solution to the jagged edge problem than applied in this chapter. Chicago FED (2001)
uses auxiliary models to forecast missing observations. The strategy in Altissimo et al.
(2001, 2006) is to shift particular variables in order to obtain a data set that is complete
at the end of the sample. For example, if there is one more month available for surveys
than for industrial production, we can realign the two series by dating industrial
production referring to month t − 1 as a time t observation.8 In this case, the model used
for the projection is not time invariant, since it changes with the pattern of data
availability. For this reason, the nowcast revision cannot be expressed as a function of
well-defined and model-consistent news.




5. Empirical Results
Page 12 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

In this section we illustrate the ideas developed previously by employing the model
described in section 3 to forecasting of quarter-on-quarter GDP growth and annual
inflation in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). The purpose is to illustrate
how the real-time data flow shapes the evolution of consecutive forecast updates. More
precisely, we examine how releases of different groups of data revise the forecast and
affect the associated forecast uncertainty.

        For each target variable and each reference period we consider a sequence of
  (p. 205)

forecast updates. These are produced twice a month at dates that correspond,
approximately, to the releases of major groups of hard and soft data (in the middle and at
the end of each month, respectively).

We are also interested in the role of more disaggregated sectoral data. To this end we
compare the performance of a benchmark model that contains mainly aggregated data
with the results from a richer data set including sectoral information. Such disaggregated
data are routinely monitored by sectoral experts and can be important not only to
eventually improve forecast accuracy, but also for understanding and interpreting the
forecasts. Most of the factor models used in central banks for nowcasting are based on
large disaggregated data sets. However, sectoral information can lead to model
misspecification in small samples because it introduces idiosyncratic cross-correlation.
Hence the comparison is interesting to understand the robustness of the model with
respect to the inclusion of many variables.

In all the exercises we assume one global, one real and one nominal factor (hence the
total number of factors is r = 3) and one lag in the factor VAR (p = 1).



5.1. Data set

Let us first comment on the data set for our benchmark model. It contains 26 major
indicators on the euro-area economy. The series are presented in table 7.1. As mentioned
previously, most of the series relate to the total economy. The only exception are surveys,
which are disaggregated into major sectors. This can be important, as surveys are the
only monthly source of information on services.

The data set contains mainly monthly series, and such is the frequency of our model. Data
with the native frequency higher than monthly are aggregated as monthly averages. The
exception is commodity prices, which enter as averages over the first 15 days of a month
and hence, for a given month, are available already in its middle.9

In Table 7.1 we also report respective publication delays (in days). There are substantial
differences between the series in terms of their timeliness. For example, survey and
financial series, which are sometimes labeled as soft data, are already available at the
end of the respective reference period (or even a couple of days before). In contrast, hard
data on real activity are released with 2 to 3 months delay. However, they typically carry
a more precise signal for GDP developments. Since there is likely to be a trade-off

Page 13 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

between timeliness and precision, the data set is constructed to contain both “timely” soft
data and “precise” hard data. The last two columns of table 7.1 report the (stylized) data
availability patterns, or the “shape” of the jagged edge, that we apply for the bimonthly
forecast updates.

  (p. 206)        The disaggregated data set contains a sectoral split for industrial
                (p. 207)

production, more detailed labor market information, as well as a few more quarterly
series. A detailed list is provided in the appendix.




Page 14 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


  Table 7.1 Data set

   No                       Group                    Series                 Frequency               Publication              No. of missing observations
                                                                                                    delay (in days
                                                                                                    after                    Mid-month               End-month
                                                                                                    reference
                                                                                                    period)

   1                        Real, Hard data          IP, total              Monthly                 37–40                    2                       2
                                                     industry

   2                        Real, Hard data          IP,                    Monthly                 32–35                    2                       2
                                                     manufacturing

   3                        Real, Hard data          Retail trade,          Monthly                 33–39                    2                       2
                                                     except for
                                                     motor vehicles
                                                     and
                                                     motorcycels

   4                        Real, Hard data          New passenger          Monthly                 15–17                    1                       1
                                                     car
                                                     registrations

   5                        Real, Hard data          New orders,            Monthly                 42–45                    3                       2
                                                     manufacturing




Page 15 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                                     working on
                                                     orders

   6                        Real, Hard data          Extra euro area        Monthly                 44–48                    3                       2
                                                     trade, export,
                                                     value

   7                        Real, Hard data          Unemployment           Monthly                 29–32                    2                       2
                                                     rate, total

   8                        Real, Hard data          Index of               Monthly                 80–140                   4,5,3                   4,3,3
                                                     employment,
                                                     total industry

   9                        Real, Surveys            Purchasing             Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     managers
                                                     index,
                                                     manufacturing

   10                       Real, Surveys            Purchasing             Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     managers
                                                     survey,
                                                     services,
                                                     business
                                                     activity




Page 16 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   11                       Real, Surveys            Consumer               Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     survey,
                                                     consumer
                                                     confidence
                                                     indicator

   12                       Real, Surveys            Industry               Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     survey,
                                                     industrial
                                                     confidence
                                                     indicator

   13                       Real, Surveys            Retail trade           Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     survey, retail
                                                     confidence
                                                     indicator


   14                       Real, Surveys            Services               Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                                                     survey, services
                                                     confidence
                                                     indicator

   15                       Nominal, HICP            HICP, overall          Monthly                 15–18                    1                       1
                                                     index




Page 17 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   16                       Nominal, PPI             PPI, total             Monthly                 32–35                    2                       2
                                                     industry
                                                     excluding
                                                     construction

   17                       Nominal,                 Consumer               Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                            Surveys                  survey, price
                                                     trends over
                                                     next 12 months

   18                       Nominal,                 Industry               Monthly                 —                        1                       0
                            Surveys                  survey, selling
                                                     price
                                                     expectations
                                                     for the months
                                                     ahead


   19                       Nominal,Money            M3, index of           Monthly                 25–29                    2                       1
                                                     notional stocks

   20                       Nominal,Money            Index of loans         Monthly                 25–29                    2                       1

   21                       Real, Financial          Dow Jones Euro         Daily                   —                        1                       0
                                                     Stoxx, broad
                                                     stock exchange
                                                     index



Page 18 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   22                       Nominal,                 Euribor 3              Daily                   —                        1                       0
                            Financial                months

   23                       Nominal,                 Nominal                Daily                   —                        1                       0
                            Financial                effective
                                                     exchange rate,
                                                     core group of
                                                     currencies
                                                     against euro

   24                       Nominal,                 Raw materials          Daily                   —                        1                       0
                            Comm prices              excl. energy,
                                                     market prices

   25                       Nominal,                 Raw materials,         Daily                   —                        1                       0
                            Comm prices              crude oil,
                                                     market prices

   26                       Real, GDP                Gross domestic         Quarterly               42–44                    4,2,3                   4,2,3
                                                     product, chain
                                                     linked

  Notes: The fifth column of the table indicates the typical publication delay (in days) for each series. It may vary from month to
  month, depending, for example, on configuration of business days. “—” means no publication delay,” such series are available
  directly at the end of the reference period (or a couple of days before). Based on a typical publication delay, we report in the sixth
  and seventh columns a (stylized) number of missing observations at the end of the sample in the middle and at the end of a month.



Page 19 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

  For employment index and GDP we report three numbers (corresponding to the first, second, and third month of each quarter), as
  these series are not released each month. We use these data availability patterns in the forecast evaluatione xercises.




Page 20 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


5.2. Forecast updates and news

As an illustration, we first produce a sequence of forecast updates for GDP growth rate in
the fourth quarter of 2008 and for annual HICP inflation in December 2008. Since
inflation is available at monthly frequency and with short publication lags, it is not our
focus. However, having a model that can consider jointly prices and quantities is
potentially useful for interpreting results.

For the GDP, we consider bimonthly updates of next, current, and previous quarter
forecasts. Specifically, for the fourth quarter of 2008 we produce a first forecast with data
available in mid-July 2008 and we subsequently update it at 2-week intervals, each time
incorporating new data releases.10 The resulting six updates performed from July through
September target the next-quarter GDP growth. With the update from mid-October
through the end of December we effectively project current-quarter GDP growth. The last
two updates are performed in January 2009 and they refer to the previous quarter (the
flash estimate for 2008 Q4 GDP was released in mid-February). In some applications
next-, current-, and previous quarter forecasts are labeled as “forecasts,” “nowcasts,” and
“backcasts,” respectively.

Concerning HICP inflation, we proceed in a similar manner. We produce the first forecast
in mid-July and we update it twice a month up to end of December 2008 (HICP is typically
released around 2 weeks after the end of the reference period).11

                                                                 The evolution of the
                                                                 forecast for both variables
                                                                 as produced by our model
                                                                 is depicted in figure 7.1. In
                                                                 the same chart we report
                                                                 the contribution of the
                                                                 news component of the
                                                                 various data groups to the
                                                                 forecast revision.12 As
                                                                 explained in section 2, the
                                                                 difference between two
                                                                 consecutive forecasts, that
                                                                 is, the forecast revision, is
                                                                 the sum over all the
                                                                 released variables of the
        Click to view larger
                                                                 product of the news
        Figure 7.1 Contribution of news to forecast
        revisions.                                               related to a particular
                                                                 variable and the
associated weight in the GDP estimate [see equation (4)]. The contribution of the news
from a block of variables is the sum of contributions of the series belonging to this block.



Page 21 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

The composition of different blocks is indicated in the second column of table 7.1. To
make the graphs easier to read, certain groups have been merged. In the case of GDP
forecast, all nominal variables, for example, constitute a single group. (p. 208)

Let us comment on the evolution of the GDP forecast. At the beginning of the forecasting
period the forecast remains rather flat, corroborating the above-mentioned difficulties in
forecasting beyond the current quarter. The first substantial downward revision (pointing
to a negative GDP growth) comes with the release of surveys for October, which is the
first block of real data referring to the current quarter. This negative news in October is
confirmed by subsequent data, both surveys and hard data. In fact, with all subsequent
releases the forecasts are revised downward. In addition , later in the reference quarter
the news from the hard data block become more sizable. This is in line with the results of
Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008) and Bańbura and Rünstler (2011), who show that
less timely (p. 209) hard data become important only later in the forecast sequence. The
contribution of the nominal block is rather limited throughout the whole forecast cycle.

Concerning HICP inflation, the largest revisions are caused by the releases of HICP itself
and of commodity prices. These seem to be the most informative data sources on the
short-term developments in inflation. In contrast, the contribution of the news from the
surveys on prices and from the real block is relatively small. The same is true for news on
other nominal variables such as money, exchange rate or interest rates.

Some caution should be taken when reading the results since our model assumes
constant parameters. The downturn has been rather deep relative to what was
experienced during the sample and hence parameter instability and stochastic volatility
might have played an important role (for a recent study see Mitchell, 2009). Our model
assumes that the parameters are stable, this is an important limitation although there are
some results concerning the robustness of factor models to parameters instability, see
e.g. Stock and Watson (2008).



5.3. Forecast uncertainty

Uncertainty around the nowcast related to signal extraction at any point in time can be
easily evaluated using the Kalman filtering techniques (see Giannone, Reichlin, and
Small, 2008). However, these estimates only hold under the the assumption that errors
are Gaussian and that the model is well specified. To overcome these limitations we will
assess forecast uncertainty by evaluating the average historical performances of the
model.

To this end, we perform a simulated pseudo real time forecasting exercise. This means
that at each point in time we estimate the parameters of the model and produce forecasts
using the data that replicates the pattern of data availability at the time. Estimating the
model recursively takes into account estimation uncertainty.



Page 22 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

We are, in particular, interested in how uncertainty evolves as the information related to
the target period accrues. Since the bimonthly updates described in the previous section
differ in terms of available information, we examine the average accuracy for each of
them separately. As the measure of uncertainty we choose the Root Mean Squared
Forecast Error (RMSFE) and we evaluate it over the period 2000–2007. The resulting
uncertainty for our benchmark model is depicted in figure 7.2. On the x-axis we use the
same labels as in figure 7.1 to indicate that the average uncertainty was computed with
the same data availability assumptions, relative to the target period. There is a slight
difference in the chart for inflation as for RMSFE; we also consider longer forecast
horizons.

For comparison we plot the same average uncertainty measure for forecasts produced by
univariate naïve models. For GDP it is the random walk with drift for the levels of logged
GDP. For HICP it is the driftless random walk for the annual inflation.

                                                                  We can observe that, as
                                                                  the information
                                                                  accumulates, the gains in
                                                                  forecast accuracy are
                                                                  substantial. For GDP the
                                                                  RMSFE is reduced by 50%
                                                                  as we move from (p. 210)
                                                                  the first to the last forecast
                                                                  in the sequence. For
                                                                  “earlier” forecasts, larger
                                                                  gains are obtained when
                                                                  surveys are released (the
                                                                  decreases in RMSFE
                                                                  corresponding to end-of-
                                                                  month releases are larger).
         Figure 7.2 Unconditional uncertainty around the
         forecast.
                                                                  When hard data for the
                                                                  reference quarter become
available, surveys lose their importance. This suggests that soft data are relevant due to
their timeliness but, conditional on the availability of hard data for the same reference
period, they are uninformative. This confirms the results in Bańbura and Rünstler (2011),
Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008), and Matheson (2010). We also note that the
uncertainty measures associated with next-quarter forecasts for the benchmark and naïve
model are comparable, confirming earlier results about the difficulties of forecasting
beyond the current quarter. This also applies to institutional forecasts (see Giannone,
Reichlin, and Small 2008).

  (p. 211)      Decreasing uncertainty corresponding to the inclusion of the newly
                (p. 212)

published data as we proceed throughout the quarter is also true for HICP inflation. We




Page 23 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

gain in forecast accuracy mostly due to mid-month releases, corresponding to the release
of the HICP itself and of commodity prices.




Page 24 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


  Table 7.2 Forecast uncertainty

   GDP                                                                                  HICP

                    Ben                Disagg        RW                AR                                Ben              Disagg           RW                AR

   mid Jul          0.28               0.29          0.32              0.33             mid Dec          0.34             0.36             0.59              0.58
   08                                                                                   07

   end Jul 08       0.27               0.27          0.32              0.33             end Dec          0.35             0.37             0.59              0.58
                                                                                        07

   mid Aug          0.27               0.27          0.32              0.32             mid Mar          0.32             0.33             0.47              0.46
   08                                                                                   08

   end Aug          0.26               0.25          0.32              0.32             end Mar          0.32             0.33             0.47              0.46
   08                                                                                   08


   mid Sep          0.25               0.26          0.32              0.32             mid Jun          0.32             0.33             0.42              0.38
   08                                                                                   08

   end Sep          0.25               0.25          0.32              0.32             end Jun          0.32             0.33             0.42              0.38
   08                                                                                   08

   mid Oct          0.24               0.24          0.32              0.32             mid Sep          0.29             0.30             0.41              0.31
   08                                                                                   08




Page 25 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   end Oct          0.23               0.23          0.32              0.32             end Sep          0.30             0.30             0.41              0.31
   08                                                                                   08

   mid Nov          0.21               0.23          0.31              0.27             mid Oct          0.26             0.26             0.38              0.28
   08                                                                                   08

   end Nov          0.21               0.21          0.31              0.27             end Oct          0.26             0.26             0.38              0.28
   08                                                                                   08

   mid Dec          0.20               0.22          0.31              0.27             mid Nov          0.20             0.20             0.31              0.23
   08                                                                                   08

   end Dec          0.20               0.21          0.31              0.27             end Nov          0.20             0.20             0.31              0.23
   08                                                                                   08

   mid Jan          0.18               0.20          0.31              0.27             mid Dec          0.11             0.11             0.20              0.16
   09                                                                                   08

   end Jan          0.18               0.20          0.31              0.27             end Dec          0.11             0.12             0.20              0.16
   09                                                                                   08

  Notes: Table provides forecast uncertainty for quarter-on-quarter GDP and annual HICP inflation for different models. Ben refers to
  the benchmark model with 26 variables (see Table 7.1). Disagg refers to the specification with more disaggregated data (see the
  appendix). RW denotes random walk with drift model for levels of logged GDP and random walk without drift for annual inflation. AR
  refers to an autoregressive model for quarterly growth rates of GDP and monthly growth rates of HICP. Uncertainty is given by the
  root mean squared forecast error evaluated over the period 2000–2007. Dates in the first columns indicate data availability patterns



Page 26 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

  with respect to the reference period of 2008 Q4 for GDP and 2008 for annual inflation. These availability patterns were applied
  recursively in the forecast evaluation.




Page 27 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Finally, let us compare the results with forecast accuracy of the model including more
disaggregated data. Table 7.2 reports the corresponding RMSFE-based uncertainty. We
also recall the results for the benchmark and random walk models, and consider
autoregressive univariate models.

The exercise based on disaggregated data shows that including more variables does not
improve the accuracy of the forecast but does not affect its stability. Since, in for
example, the preparation of policy briefings, it might be necessary to comment on many
releases, including disaggregated data, this is good news. Our framework is robust to the
inclusion of a rich data set.




Page 28 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting




6. New Developments and Open Problems
Factor models are not the only solution to the problem of nowcasting. In principle, any
dynamic model that can handle mixed frequencies and missing observations and can
capture the joint dynamics of the target and the predictor variables can be used.
Different examples in the literature are Evans (2005) or the VAR proposed by Zadrozny
(1990) and Giannone, Reichlin, and Simonelli (2009). The frequentist approach to VAR
estimation is, however, not suitable when one needs to handle more than a few series. A
promising line for future research is to build on ideas in Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin
(2010) to develop nowcasting tools based on VARs where Bayesian shrinkage is used to
cope with the curse of the dimensionality problem.

Another idea for further research is to link the high-frequency nowcasting framework
with a quarterly structural model in a coherent way. Giannone, Monti, and Reichlin (2009)
have suggested a solution and other developments are in progress. A byproduct of this
analysis is that one can obtain real time estimates of variables that can only be defined
theoretically such as the output gap or the natural rate of interest.

Finally, let us mention that the framework presented here has some limitations.

First, the revision process is not taken into account. Although Giannone, Reichlin, and
Small (2008) point out that factor models are robust to data revisions if revision errors
among different variables are poorly cross-correlated, modelling explicitly the interplay
between data revisions and nowcasting is an import line for future research. Evans
(2005) is a first step in this direction. His approach is to model the revision process for
GDP only imposing the assumption that revisions are noise. The challenge is to
parsimoniously model the revision process for all variables allowing for both noise and
news.

  (p. 213)      Second, we do not incorporate data at frequencies higher than monthly. The
model we base our discussion on can be updated at any frequency (minute, day, week, ….)
as data are released but includes only monthly and quarterly variables. Financial
variables, for example, are converted to monthly frequency and treated as being released
only when information on the entire month is available. Although the model can be
adapted to properly take into account high frequency data, this is still unfinished work.
Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti (2009) is a first attempt to deal with this problem. They use a
small factor model and apply it to the construction of a coincident indicator of the state of
the economy rather than to the nowcasting problem. Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos
(2008) propose an alternative approach based on MIDAS but treat the predictors as
predetermined. The challenge is to model higher frequency within a joint model in order
to maintain the ability of understanding the nowcast updates in terms of news.




Page 29 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Last but not least, we do not consider parameters instability and stochastic volatility. This
is an interesting line for future research on nowcasting. The challenge there consists in
allowing for general forms of time variation within a parsimonious set-up.




7. Conclusions
In this chapter we define nowcasting as the prediction of the present, the very near
future, and the very recent past. Key in this process is to use timely monthly information
in order to nowcast quarterly variables that are published with long delays. We have
argued that the nowcasting process goes beyond the simple production of an early
estimate and requires the analysis of the link between the news in consecutive data
releases and the resulting forecast revisions for the target variable. We have described an
econometric framework that is designed for this analysis. In this framework, all variables
are considered within a single system and hence meaningful model-based news can be
extracted and the revisions of the nowcast can be expressed as a function of news.

The methodology allows to process a large amount of information and to produce a
sequence of nowcasts in relation to the real time releases of various economic data, as it
is traditionally done by practitioners, but it does it in a fully automatic way.

To illustrate our ideas, we provide an application for the nowcast of euro-area GDP in the
fourth quarter of 2008 and we also present results for annual inflation in December 2008.



References
Aastveit, K. A., and T. G. Trovik. 2008. Nowcasting Norwegian GDP: the role of asset
prices in a small open economy. Working Paper 2007/09, Norges Bank.

        Altissimo, F., A. Bassanetti, R. Cristadoro, M. Forni, M. Hallin, M. Lippi, and L.
  (p. 214)

Reichlin. 2001. EuroCOIN: A real time coincident indicator of the euro area business
cycle. CEPR Discussion Paper 3108, Center for Economic Policy Research.

Altissimo, F., R. Cristadoro, M. Forni, M. Lippi, and G. Veronese. 2006. New EuroCOIN:
tracking economic growth in real time. CEPR Discussion Paper 5633, Center for
Economic Policy Research.

Andreou, E., E. Ghysels, and A. Kourtellos. 2008. Should macroeconomic forecasters look
at daily financial data? Manuscript, University of Cyprus.

Angelini, E., G. Camba-Méndez, D. Giannone, G. Rünstler, and L. Reichlin. 2008. Short-
term forecasts of euro area GDP growth. Working Paper Series 949, European Central
Bank.



Page 30 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Aruoba, S., F. X. Diebold, and C. Scotti. 2009. Real-Time Measurement of Business
Conditions. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 27(4):417–27.

Bańbura, M., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin. 2010. Large Bayesian VARs. Journal of Applied
Econometrics 25(1):71–92.

Bańbura, M., and M. Modugno. 2010. Maximum likelihood estimation of large factor
model on datasets with arbitrary pattern of missing data. Working Paper 1189, European
Central Bank.

Bańbura, M., and G. Rünstler. 2011. A look into the factor model black box. Publication
lags and the role of hard and soft data in forecasting GDP. International Journal of
Forecasting 27(2):333–346.

Bundesbank. 2009. “Short-term forecasting methods as instruments of business cycle
analysis” in Monthly Report, April, 31–44, Deutsche Bundesbank.

Camacho, M., and G. Perez-Quiros. 2010. Introducing the EURO-STING: short term
indicator of euro area growth. Journal of Applied Econometrics 25(4):663–94.

ChicagoFED. 2001. CFNAI background release. Discussion paper. http://
www.chicagofed.org/economicresearchanddata/national/pdffiles/CFNAIbga.pdf.

Clements, M. P., and A. B. Galvão. 2008. Macroeconomic forecasting with mixed-
frequency data. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26:546–54.

Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers. 1989. What moves stock prices? Journal
of Portfolio Management 15:4–12.

D'Agostino, A., K. McQuinn, and D. O'Brien. 2008. Now-casting Irish GDP. Research
Technical Papers 9/RT/08, Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of Ireland
(CBFSAI).

Dempster, A., N. Laird, and D. Rubin. 1977. Maximum likelihood estimation from
incomplete data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 14:1–38.

Diron, M.. 2008. Short-term forecasts of euro area real GDP growth: an assessment of
real-time performance based on vintage data. Journal of Forecasting 27(5):371–90.

Doz, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin 2006a. A maximum likelihood approach for large
approximate dynamic factor models. Working Paper 674, European Central Bank.

Doz, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin. 2006b. A two-step estimator for large approximate
dynamic factor models based on Kalman filtering. Unpublished manuscript, Université
Libre de Bruxelles.

Durbin, J., and S. J. Koopman. 2001. Time series analysis by state space methods. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Page 31 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

ECB. 2008. “Short-term forecasts of economic activity in the euro area” in Monthly
Bulletin, April, 69–74, European Central Bank.

Evans, M. D. D. 2005. Where are we now? Real-time estimates of the macroeconomy.
International Journal of Central Banking 1(2):127–75.

        Forni, M., M. Hallin, M. Lippi, and L. Reichlin. 2000. The generalized dynamic
  (p. 215)

factor model: identification and estimation. Review of Economics and Statistics 82(4):
540–54.

Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov. 2004. The MIDAS touch: mixed data
sampling regression models. Mimeo, Chapel Hill, NC.

Ghysels, E., and J. H. Wright. 2009. Forecasting professional forecasters. Journal of
Business and Economics Statistics 27(4):504–16.

Giannone, D., F. Monti, and L. Reichlin. 2009. Incorporating conjunctural analysis in
structural models. In The science and practice of monetary policy today, ed. V. Wieland.
Berlin: Springer, 41–57.

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and L. Sala. 2004. Monetary policy in real time. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, ed. M. Gertler and K. Rogoff. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 161–
200.

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and S. Simonelli. 2009. Nowcasting euro area economic activity
in real-time: the role of confidence indicator. National Institute Economic Review 210:90–
97.

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and D. Small. 2008. Nowcasting: the real-time informational
content of macroeconomic data. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(4):665–76.

Kitchen, J., and R. M. Monaco. 2003. Real-time forecasting in practice: the U.S. Treasury
Staff's Real-Time GDP Forecast System. Business Economics October: 10–19.

Marcellino, M., and C. Schumacher. 2010. Factor-MIDAS for now - and forecasting with
ragged-edge data: a model comparison for German GDP. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics 72(4):518–550.

Mariano, R., and Y. Murasawa. 2003. A new coincident index of business cycles based on
monthly and quarterly series. Journal of Applied Econometrics 18:427–43.

Matheson, T. D. 2010. An analysis of the informational content of New Zealand data
releases: The importance of business opinion surveys. Economic Modelling 27(1):304–14.

Mitchell, J. 2009. Where are we now? The UK recession and nowcasting GDP growth
using statistical models. National Institute Economic Review 209:60–9.




Page 32 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Mitchell, J., R. J. Smith, M. R. Weale, S. Wright, and E. L. Salazar. 2005. An indicator of
monthly GDP and an early estimate of quarterly GDP Growth. Economic Journal
115(501):F108–F129.

Parigi, G., and R. Golinelli. 2007. The use of monthly indicators to forecast quarterly GDP
in the short run: an application to the G7 countries. Journal of Forecasting 26(2):77–94.

Parigi, G., and G. Schlitzer. 1995. Quarterly forecasts of the italian business cycle by
means of monthly indicators. Journal of Forecasting 14(2):117–41.

Proietti, T. 2008. Estimation of Common factors under cross-sectional and temporal
aggregation constraints: nowcasting monthly GDP and its main components. MPRA Paper
6860, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Rünstler, G., K. Barhoumi, S. Benk, R. Cristadoro, A. D. Reijer, A. Jakaitiene, P. Jelonek, A.
Rua, K. Ruth, and C. V. Nieuwenhuyze. 2009. Short-term forecasting of GDP using large
data sets: a pseudo real-time forecast evaluation exercise. Journal of Forecasting 28:595–
611.

Rünstler, G., and F. Sédillot. 2003. Short-term estimates of euro area real GDP by means
of monthly data. Working Paper 276, European Central Bank.

Schumacher, C., and J. Breitung. 2008. Real-time forecasting of German GDP based on a
large factor model with monthly and quarterly data. International Journal of Forecasting
24:386–98.

        Shumway, R., and D. Stoffer. 1982. An approach to time series smoothing and
  (p. 216)

forecasting using the EM algorithm. Journal of Time Series Analysis 3:253–64.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 1989. New indexes of coincident and leading economic
indicators. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 351–93.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 2002a. Forecasting Using Principal Components from a
Large Number of Predictors. Journal of the American Statistical Association 97(460):147–
62.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 2002b. Macroeconomic forecasting using diffusion
indexes. Journal of Business and Economics Statistics 20(2):147–62.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 2008. Forecasting in dynamic factor models subject to
structural instability. In The methodology and practice of econometrics, A festschrift in
honour of professor David F. Hendry, ed. J. Castle, and N. Shephard. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Trehan, B. 1989. Forecasting growth in current quarter real GNP. Economic Review
(Winter): 39–52.


Page 33 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

Watson, M. W., and R. F. Engle. 1983. Alternative algorithms for the estimation of
dynamic factor, mimic and varying coefficient regression models. Journal of Econometrics
23:385–400.

Zadrozny, P. 1990. Estimating a multivariate ARMA model with mixed-frequency data: an
application to forecating U. S. GNP at monthly intervals. Working Paper Series 90–6,
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.




Appendix A: Description of the Data Set
  (p. 217)      (p. 218)   (p. 219)




Page 34 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


  Appendix

   No.              Group              Series        Frequen           No. of missing                    Specification                     Transf
                                                     cy                observations

                                                                       Mid-             End-             Ben              Disagg           log               diff
                                                                       month            month

   1                Real,              IP, Total       Monthly              2                2                 x                                 x                  x
                    Hard data          industry

   2                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                 x                                 x                  x
                    Hard data          Manufact
                                       uring

   3                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                  x
                    Hard data          Construct
                                       ion

   4                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                  x
                    Hard data          Energy

   5                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                  x
                    Hard data          Intermedi
                                       ate goods
                                       industry




Page 35 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   6                Real,              IP, Capital     Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    Hard data          goods
                                       industry

   7                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    Hard data          Durable
                                       consumer
                                       goods
                                       industry

   8                Real,              IP,             Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    Hard data          Nondurab
                                       le
                                       consumer
                                       goods
                                       industry


   9                Real,              Retail          Monthly              2                2                 x                x                x                x
                    Hard data          trade,
                                       except of
                                       motor
                                       vehicles
                                       and
                                       motorcycl
                                       es




Page 36 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   10               Real,              New             Monthly              1                1                 x                x                x                x
                    Hard data          passenge
                                       r car
                                       registraio
                                       ns

   11               Real,              New             Monthly              3                2                 x                x                x                x
                    Hard data          orders,
                                       manufact
                                       uring
                                       working
                                       on orders

   12               Real,              Extra-          Monthly              3                2                 x                x                x                x
                    Hard data          euro-area
                                       trade,
                                       export
                                       value

   13               Real,              Intra-          Monthly              3                2                                  x                x                x
                    Hard data          euro-area
                                       trade,
                                       export,
                                       value




Page 37 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   14               Real,              Unemplo         Monthly              2                2                 x                                                  x
                    Hard data          yment
                                       rate, total

   15               Real,              Unemplo         Monthly              2                2                                  x                                 x
                    Hard data          yment
                                       rate, 25
                                       years and
                                       over

   16               Real,              Unemplo         Monthly              2                2                                  x                                 x
                    Hard data          yment
                                       rate,
                                       under 25
                                       years

   17               Real,              Index of        Monthly            4,5,3            4,3,3               x                                 x                x
                    Hard data          employm
                                       ent, total
                                       industry

   18               Real,              Index of        Monthly            4,5,3            4,3,3                                x                x                x
                    Hard data          employm
                                       ent,
                                       constructi
                                       on



Page 38 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   19               Real,              Index of        Monthly            4,5,3            4,2,3                                x                x                x
                    Hard data          employm
                                       ent, retail
                                       trade,
                                       exc.motor
                                       vehicles/
                                       motorcycl
                                       es

   20               Real,              Index of        Monthly            4,5,3            4,2,3                                x                x                x
                    Hard data          employm
                                       ent,
                                       manufact
                                       uring

   21               Real,              Purchasin       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            g
                                       managers
                                       index,
                                       manufact
                                       uring

   22               Real,              Purchasin       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            g
                                       managers
                                       survey,



Page 39 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       services,
                                       business
                                       activity

   23               Real,              Purchasin       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            g
                                       managers
                                       survey,
                                       manufact
                                       uring,
                                       employm
                                       ent

   24               Real,              Purchasin       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            g
                                       managers
                                       survey,
                                       services,
                                       employm
                                       ent

   25               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       confidenc
                                       e
                                       indicator



Page 40 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   26               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       consumer
                                       confidenc
                                       e
                                       indicator

   27               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       services
                                       confidenc
                                       e
                                       indicator

   28               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       retail
                                       confidenc
                                       e
                                       indicator

   29               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       constructi
                                       on
                                       confidenc



Page 41 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       e
                                       indicator

   30               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       employm
                                       ent
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   31               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       consumer
                                       unemploy
                                       ment
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   32               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       services
                                       employm
                                       ent
                                       expectati
                                       ons




Page 42 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   33               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       retail
                                       employm
                                       ent
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   34               Real,              Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       constructi
                                       on
                                       employm
                                       ent
                                       expectati
                                       ons


   35               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                 x                x                x                x
                    HICP               overall
                                       index

   36               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                                  x                x                x
                    HICP               energy

   37               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                                  x                x                x
                    HICP               processed



Page 43 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       food incl.
                                       alcohol
                                       and
                                       tobacco

   38               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                                  x                x                x
                    HICP               unproces
                                       sed food

   39               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                                  x                x                x
                    HICP               industrial
                                       goods
                                       excluding
                                       energy

   40               Nominal,           HICP,           Monthly              1                1                                  x                x                x
                    HICP               services


   41               Nominal,           PPI, total      Monthly              2                2                 x                x                x                x
                    PPI                industry
                                       (excludin
                                       g
                                       constructi
                                       on)

   42               Nominal,           PPI,            Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    PPI                manufact
                                       ure of

Page 44 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       food
                                       products
                                       and
                                       beverage
                                       s

   43               Nominal,           PPI, MIG        Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    PPI                energy

   44               Nominal,           PPI,            Monthly              2                2                                  x                x                x
                    PPI                consumer
                                       goods
                                       industry

   45               Nominal,           Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       selling
                                       price
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   46               Nominal,           Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       consumer
                                       goods
                                       selling

Page 45 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       price
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   47               Nominal,           Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       intemedia
                                       te goods
                                       selling
                                       price
                                       expectati
                                       ons

   48               Nominal,           Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       consumer
                                       price
                                       trends
                                       over last
                                       12
                                       months

   49               Nominal,           Eur. Com.       Monthly              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       consumer
                                       price
                                       trends

Page 46 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       over
                                       next12
                                       months

   50               Nominal,           M3, index       Monthly              2                1                 x                x                x                x
                    Money              of
                                       notional
                                       stocks

   51               Nominal,           Index of        Monthly              2                1                 x                x                x                x
                    Money              loans

   52               Real,              Dow               Daily              1                0                 x                x                x                x
                    Financial          Jones
                                       Euro
                                       Stoxx,
                                       broad
                                       stock
                                       exchange
                                       index

   53               Nominal,           Euribor, 3        Daily              1                0                 x                x                                 x
                    Financial          months

   54               Nominal,           10-year           Daily              1                0                                  x                                 x
                    Financial          govt.




Page 47 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

                                       bond
                                       yield

   55               Nominal,           Nominal           Daily              1                0                 x                x                x                x
                    Financial          effective
                                       exchange
                                       rate, core
                                       group of
                                       currencie
                                       s against
                                       euro

   56               Nominal,           Raw               Daily              1                0                 x                x                x                x
                    Comm               materials
                    prices             excl.
                                       energy,
                                       mkt
                                       prices

   57               Nominal,           Raw               Daily              1                0                                  x                x                x
                    Comm               materials,
                    prices             foodstuff
                                       and
                                       beverage
                                       s, mkt
                                       prices




Page 48 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   58               Nominal,           Raw               Daily              0                0                 x                x                x                x
                    Comm               materials,
                    prices             crude oil,
                                       mkt
                                       prices

   59               Real,              Gross          Quarterly           4,2,3            4,2,3               x                x                x                x
                    Hard data          domestic
                                       product,
                                       chain
                                       linked

   60               Real,              Employm        Quarterly           4,5,3            4,5,3                                x                x                x
                    Hard data          ent,
                                       domestic

   61               Real,              Eur. Com.      Quarterly          1,-1,0           -2,-1,0                               x                                 x
                    Surveys            survey,
                                       industry
                                       current
                                       level of
                                       capacity
                                       utilization




Page 49 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting


   62               Real,              GDP,           Quarterly           4,2,3            1,2,3                                x                x                x
                    Hard data          United
                                       States

   63               Nominal,           Unit           Quarterly           4,5,6            4,5,3                                x                x                x
                    Labour             labour
                    costs              cost

   64               Nominal,           Compens        Quarterly           4,5,6            4,5,3                                x                x                x
                    Labour             ation per
                    costs              employee

  Notes: Columns 5 and 6 provide the number of missing observations at the end of the sample caused by the publication delays. The
  number of missing observations depends on whether the data are captured in the middle or at the end of the month and for the
  quarterly variables also on the month within a quarter, cf. notes for Table 7.1. Negative numbers for capacity utilization reflect the
  fact that the figure on the current quarter is released before the end of this quarter (in its second month). Columns under
  Specification indicate which series were included in the benchmark model (Ben) and model with disaggregated data (Disagg),
  respectively. Columns under Trans specify whether logarithm and/or differencing was applied to the initial series.




Page 50 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an
individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting




    Appendix B: State-Space Representation of
  (p. 220)


the Model
Presented here are the details for the state-space representation of equation (11) as
specified by equations (5)–(10), for p = 1, r = 3, and a single quarterly variable ( is of
dimension 1 as in the benchmark model): (12)




where ɛt = (ɛ1,t, ɛ2,t, …, ɛn,t)′ and et = (e1,t, e2,t, …, en,t)′.

The block-specific factor structure further implies that




  (p. 221)      Hence the parameters of the model are




Page 51 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

The state-space representation can be easily modified to include an arbitrary number of
quarterly variables nQ (e.g., the model with disaggregated data contains six quarterly
variables). In that case,         , and will be vectors of length nQ. ΛQ will be a matrix of
size nQ × r and αQ will be a nQ × nQ diagonal matrix. Finally, the scalars in the lines of Z(θ)
and T(θ) corresponding to     and need to be replaced by nQ × nQ identity or zero
matrices.




Appendix C: EM Algorithm
The parameters θ of the state-space form of equation (12) are estimated by the
expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. The algorithm is a popular solution to
problems for which latent or missing data yield a direct maximization of the likelihood
function intractable or computationally difficult.13 The basic principle behind the EM is to
write the likelihood in terms of observable as well as latent variables (in our case, in
terms of x̄t and ξt, ξt = 1, …, Tv = maxi Ti,v) and, given the available data Ωv,14 obtain the
maximum likelihood estimates in a sequence of two alternating steps. Precisely, iteration j
+ 1 would consist of the following steps:

    • E-step—the expectation of the log-likelihood conditional on the data is calculated
    using the estimates from the previous iteration, θ(j),
    • M-step—the new parameters, θ(j + 1), are estimated through the maximization of the
    expected log-likelihood (from the previous iteration) with respect to θ.

Below we provide the details of the implementation of the EM algorithm for the state-space
representation of equation (12) (based on the results in Bańbura and Modugno, 2010).
We first estimate μ and μQ by sample means and use the de-meaned data throughout the
EM steps.

To deal with missing observations in x̄t we follow Bańbura and Modugno (2010) and
introduce selection matrices Wt and      . They are diagonal matrices of size n and 1,
respectively, with 1s corresponding to the nonmissing values in xt and , respectively.

For the sake of simplicity, we first consider the case without restrictions on Λ, ΛQ, A1, and
Q implied by block-specific factors.

         The maximization of the expected likelihood (M-step) with respect to θ in the (r +
  (p. 222)

1)-iteration would yield the following expressions:

    • The matrix of loadings for the monthly variables: (13)




Page 52 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting




    • The matrix of loadings for the quarterly variables: Let
                                                     and                                        . The unrestricted
    row vector of factor loadings for                is given by




    For the restricted                                     , it holds that               with




    Consequently the restricted                is given by



    • The autoregressive coefficients in the factor VAR: (14)




    • The covariance matrix in the factor VAR: (15)




          • The autoregressive coefficients in the AR representation for the idiosyncratic
      (p. 223)

    component of the monthly variables:




    • The variance in the AR representation for the idiosyncratic component of the
    monthly variables:




The conditional expectations (the E-step) in the expressions above are computed using
the Kalman smoother on the state-space representation of equation (12) with the previous



Page 53 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

iteration parameters θ(j). The initial parameters θ(0) are obtained on the basis of
principal components analysis [in the spirit of the two-step method of Doz, Giannone, and
Reichlin (2006b)].

To account for the restrictions imposed by group-specific factors, we would split the
parameters in Λ into ΛN = (ΛN,G ΛN,N) and ΛR = (ΛR,G ΛR,R) and obtain the j + 1-iteration of
ΛN by modifying the formula in equation (13) as




where                   and       and      are the subvectors of xt and ɛt containing only nominal
variables and idiosyncratic components, respectively.  can be obtained from Wt by
discarding all the rows and columns corresponding to the real data. The updating
formulas for ΛR can be obtained in an analogous fashion. To obtain restricted versions of
A1 and Q we can use equations (14) and (15) for each of the factors     , and separately.
  (p. 224)




Notes:

(1) The terminology jagged edge was first introduced in Giannone, Reichlin, and Small
(2008). The more recent nowcasting literature also uses the term ragged edge.

(2) Given our definition of nowcast as a prediction of the present, the very near future,
and the very recent past, the difference between the forecast reference period (t in
equation (1)) and maxi Ti,v is usually small and can be negative. Ωv could possibly include
more quarterly variables. We limit this set to GDP for the sake of simplicity.

(3) Typically one “additional” observation is released and we have Tj,v+1 = Tj,v + 1 for all
      . GDP could also be included in a release. We abstract from this case in order not to
complicate the notation.

(4) Explicit modeling of the dynamics of the idiosyncratic component can also be useful to
forecast variables with strong noncommon dynamics.

(5) For the sake of simplicity in the presentation we assume that there is only one
quarterly variable, GDP. However, it is straightforward to incorporate more quarterly
variables (see the appendix).

(6) Let                               . The Kalman filter is used in case the forecast reference
period t in equation (1) is equal to or larger than Tv. The Kalman smoother is used
otherwise.



Page 54 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

(7) Mariano and Murasawa (2003) model is aimed at constructing a coincident index of
aggregate economic activity rather than at nowcasting.

(8) These methods have been compared empirically with the Kalman filter solution used
in this chapter by Marcellino and Schumacher (2010) and Rünstler et al. (2009).

(9) Monthly averages would have been smoother, but also less timely. Empirical results
indicate that considering more timely information on commodity prices is more optimal
for inflation. More systematic analysis on inclusion of higher frequency is left for future
research.

(10) The exercises in this and in the next section are pseudo real time, that is, we follow a
stylized publication calendar and we do not account for data revisions.

(11) Using the logarithmic approximation of a growth rate, annual inflation can be
expressed as a sum of 12 month-on-month growth rates of prices. Since prices enter the
data set as month-on-month growth rates, the forecast for annual inflation is obtained as
a sum of partially observed and partially forecast month-on-month growth rates. For
example, in mid-July we already observe the monthly growth rates for the first half of the
year and need to forecast only the remaining 6 months.

(12) For each forecast sequence the parameters are estimated only once before the first
forecast in the sequence is made and kept constant for all subsequent forecast updates.

(13) See Dempster, Laird, and Rubin (1977) for a general EM algorithm and Shumway
and Stoffer (1982) or Watson and Engle (1983) for application to state-space
representations.

(14)                       because some observations in yt are missing.


   Marta BańBura

   Marta Bańbura is economist at the European Central Bank. She holds a PhD in
   economics from Université Libre de Bruxelles. Her area of research is time series
   econometrics with a focus on macro forecasting and structural analysis with real-
   time and large information sets. She has contributions in such fields as factor
   models, Bayesian shrinkage, and wavelet methods. She has been also involved in
   developing forecasting models to aid policymaking. She has written several working
   papers and has been published in the Journal of Applied Econometrics and the
   International Journal of Forecasting.




Page 55 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
Nowcasting

   Domenico Giannone

   Domenico Giannone is a professor of economics at the Université Libre de Bruxelles.
   He is a research affiliate of the CEPR in the International Macroeconomics
   Programme and holds his PhD in economics from the Université Libre de Bruxelles,
   2004. He has worked as an Economist at the Monetary Policy Research Division of
   the European Central Bank and has been scientific coordinator of the Euro Area
   Business Cycle Network. His research has been centered around the theme of
   exploiting information contained in many macroeconomic and financial variables. His
   research has been published in international journals, including the Journal of
   Monetary Economics, Journal of Econometrics, Econometric Theory, and Proceedings
   of the National Academy of Science.

   Lucrezia Reichlin

   Lucrezia Reichlin is a professor of economics at the London Business School.
   Between March 2005 and September 2008 she served as director general of
   research at the European Central Bank and before that she held academic posts in
   different universities around the world. She has published numerous pepers on
   econometrics and macroeconomics. She is an expert on forecasting, business cycle
   analysis, and monetary policy. One of her main areas of research has been the
   econometrics of large-dimensional data, where she produced some of the earliest
   contributions on the theory of factor models with many time series and, more
   recently, studied Bayesian shrinkage in that environment. Some of the methods she
   has developed, in particular those for nowcasting, are widely used in central banks
   around the world. Her papers have appeared in top scientific journals, including
   American Economic Review, Review of Economic Studies, Review of Economics and
   Statistics, Journal of Econometrics, Journal of Monetary Econometrics, and Journal of
   the American Statistical Association.




Page 56 of 56

PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2015. All Rights
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use.

Subscriber: Durham University; date: 19 April 2018
