                                  Gathering Insights on the Forest from
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago


                                  the Trees: A New Metric for Financial
                                  Conditions
                                  Scott Brave and R. Andrew Butters




                                                 WP 2010-07
       Gathering Insights on the Forest from the Trees:
           A New Metric for Financial Conditions∗
                              Scott Brave†, R. Andrew Butters‡
                                         August 24, 2010


                                               Abstract
          By incorporating the Harvey accumulator into the large approximate dynamic factor
      framework of Doz et al. (2006), we are able to construct a coincident index of financial
      conditions from a large unbalanced panel of mixed frequency financial indicators. We
      relate our financial conditions index, or FCI, to the concept of a “financial crisis” using
      Markov-switching techniques. After demonstrating the ability of the index to capture
      “crisis” periods in U.S. financial history, we present several policy-geared threshold
      rules for the FCI using Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) curve analysis.
         JEL Code: G01, G17, C22
      Keywords: financial crisis, financial conditions, dynamic factor, EM algorithm, Harvey
      accumulator, ROC curve, Markov-switching


1     Introduction
    Financial innovation over the course of the past 40 years has made it difficult to capture
broad financial conditions in a small number of variables covering just a few traditional
financial markets. Recent research has instead focused on capturing financial conditions
from variables that span several traditional as well as more recently developed markets.
Here, we take this approach a step further applying the large approximate dynamic factor
methods of Doz et al. (2006) to a data set of 100 financial indicators capturing a broad array
of information on financial markets.
   ∗
     The views expressed herein are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the
Federal Reserve System. The authors would like to thank, without implicating, Alejandro Justiniano, Hesna
Genay, Spencer Krane, Jeff Campbell, Gadi Barlevy, Simon Gilchrist, Bill Nelson, and Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago seminar participants. We would also like to thank An Qi and Christian Delgado for excellent
research assistance.
   †
     Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago: sbrave@frbchi.org
   ‡
     Northwestern University: r-butters@kellogg.northwestern.edu


                                                   1
    The information in these indicators is distilled in a single high frequency index, the
Financial Conditions Index, or FCI. What separates the FCI from other similar indexes is
that it allows for real-time examination of financial conditions from an unbalanced panel of
mixed frequency indicators. We show that increasing values of the FCI capture rising risk
premia, declining credit volumes, and deleveraging across the financial system.
    To illustrate its usefulness, we relate the FCI to the concept of a “financial crisis”, using
differences in the mean and volatility in the index over time to identify a Markov-switching
process. Our results demonstrate that the FCI accurately captures the major events in
U.S. financial history over the past 37 years. Based on these major events, we then develop
threshold rules for the index using methods of analysis common to medical statistics to derive
a framework that balances the costs and benefits of identifying financial crises in real-time.


2    Literature
    Measures of financial conditions generally involve a weighted average of a number of
financial indicators. Some prominent examples are the indexes of Illing and Liu (2006), Nelson
and Perli (2007), Hakkio and Keeton (2009) and Hatzius et al. (2010). Several of these indexes
use a method called “principal components analysis” (PCA) to estimate the weight placed
on each series. PCA interprets the importance of movements in any number of data series
based on their relative historical correlations. In this fashion, contradictory movements are
sorted out in a way that is consistent with the historical importance of individual indicators
to the broader financial system.
    Typically, these PCA-based measures are constructed as the first principal component of
a set of underlying financial indicators, where “first” signifies that it is the element common
to all of the indicators that explains the largest amount of the total variation among them.
Standardizations vary, but often a positive index value is associated with deteriorating finan-
cial conditions with the magnitude measured in standard deviations from the sample mean
of the index.
    This form of index construction has an equivalent representation as a restricted least
squares problem given a latent factor Ft and factor loadings Λ such that ε0t εt = N̂ IN̂ where
N̂ is the number of data series. Consider the linear model below, where Yit is a vector of
stationary variables that have been demeaned and standardized to have a unit variance:


                                       Yit = Λi Ft + εit                                     (1)

    Given a panel of sufficient size, Bai and Ng (2002) show that PCA estimates of the latent
factors are consistent.
    Indexes of this kind also have the advantage of capturing the interconnectedness of finan-
cial indicators. The more interrelated an indicator is with its peers, the higher the weight
it receives in the index. This opens up the possibility that a small deterioration in a highly


                                               2
weighted indicator may mean more for the state of financial conditions than a large deterio-
ration in an indicator that receives little weight. In this way, PCA assigns a relative ranking
consistent with an indicator’s systemic importance.
    The PCA method of index construction has become commonplace in the measurement of
business cycles. A prominent example is the Chicago Fed National Activity Index based on
the work of Stock and Watson (1999) which captures a single latent factor extracted from 85
variables describing U.S. economic activity. More recently, it has also begun to be applied to
financial variables. For instance, Hakkio and Keeton (2009) estimate their Kansas City Fed
Financial Stress Index, or KCFSI, from a sample of U.S. financial indicators on the health
of the banking system, debt, equity and money markets.
    Variation in the frequency or availability of data, however, makes the PCA decomposition
above infeasible without alteration. For financial variables where higher frequency data is
generally available, the typical alteration consists of using only those variables with consistent
time series and/or moving to a monthly or even quarterly frequency of measurement. The
KCFSI fits this description, focusing on a small sample of indicators at a monthly frequency.
    In contrast, Stock and Watson (2002) show how this problem can instead be addressed
by introducing an iterative estimation strategy. Their algorithm relies on the fact that
PCA reduces to ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation when Ft is known. From an initial
balanced subset of the data, one produces an initial guess for Ft by means of PCA, followed
by Λ by OLS projection onto this guess. Missing values are then replaced by their expectation
conditional on the observed data and estimates of Ft and Λ are updated until the sum of
squared errors for the complete data converges to some criterion.
    As the size of the cross-section grows, Stock and Watson (2002) demonstrate that this
strategy produces a consistent estimate of Ft robust to weak serial correlation between the
idiosyncratic errors and within them across time. Furthermore, Bai and Ng (2004) show that
this is also true for dynamic factor models in the sense that the static factors estimated by
PCA can potentially span the same space as the true dynamic factors.
     Hatzius et al. (2010) employ this “cross-sectional averaging” strategy to construct the
USMPFFCI, stretching the index history back to the early 1970’s compared with the early
1990’s for the KCFSI. They demonstrate that this method also has the advantage of incor-
porating information in a manner consistent with the development of financial markets that
have grown in importance over time, i.e. securitized debt, repo, and derivatives markets.
By doing so, they are able to compare the level of financial conditions during many known
periods of crisis while still taking account of financial innovation.
    A shortcoming of their work, however, is that it, too, requires an initial balanced panel in
order to use PCA. Hatzius et al. (2010) relax this constraint by estimating a quarterly index.
The potential usefulness of high frequency financial indicators in a real-time setting where
decisions must be made is a feature we would like to retain in our FCI. Therefore, the model
we describe below will incorporate an unbalanced panel of mixed frequency indicators. Here,
we build off the work of Aruoba et al. (2009) in their measurement of business conditions at
a weekly frequency.


                                                3
3       The model
    Fundamentally, the model for the Financial Conditions Index is similar to any coincident
index model where the variation in a number of indicators is governed by one common source
(a factor) and an idiosyncratic term. In a purely static sense, equation (1) represents the
model, with t = 1, . . . , T̂ and i = 1, . . . , N̂ where in our particular baseline model T̂ is the
time series length of the longest available indicator and N̂ is the number of variables. Here,
Ft represents the common source of variation, or factor, in Yit . For our purposes, this factor
will serve as a proxy for the state of financial conditions.
    In this model, each indicator can have different sensitivities to the common factor (con-
trolled by the heterogenous Λi ), however, the overall responsiveness of each indicator to
changes in the factor remains constant over time.1 A unique characteristic of Yit in our
particular context is not only its size (in both the cross section and frequency domain) but
also that it contains series of varying reported frequencies and series that start and end at
different times within the sample.2
    Where we depart from the previous literature is that our estimate of the unobserved factor
will take into account both the cross-sectional correlations in the data as well as any dynamic
correlations. In our model, any dynamic correlations will be absorbed in the dynamics of Ft .
Adding dynamics of some finite order (p? ) to the unobserved factor moves the model above
into the standard state space representation:


                                            yt = Zt αt + t                                                 (2)
                                          αt+t = Tt αt + Rt ηt ,                                            (3)

    where t ∼ N (0, H) and ηt ∼ N (0, Q).3
    This model can be estimated using the EM algorithm outlined by Shumway and Stoffer
(1982) and Watson and Engle (1983) in order to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of
the system matrices and subsequently the unobserved factor. In general, the EM algorithm
requires one pass through the Kalman filter and smoother, and then re-estimation of the
state-space parameters using ordinary least squares estimation at each iteration.4 The re-
sulting sequence of log-likelihood function valuations is non-decreasing, and convergence of
the algorithm is governed by its stability.5
    1
      This restriction can be relaxed. Consistency requires only that the factor loadings “change slowly” over
time. For further details, see Stock and Watson (2002).
    2
      In what follows, we restrict our attention to the period from 1973 onward during which at least 25 percent
of the series in the index have complete time series.
    3
      For a more descriptive formulation of the the system matrices and the state variables see section A.2.
    4
      A small alteration in the least squares step is required to account for the fact that the unobserved
components of the model must first be estimated.
    5
      For more details on the particular log-likelihood function and the methods used to implement the EM
algorithm see section A.3.



                                                       4
    The EM algorithm proves advantageous in this setting because it allows for a complete
characterization of the data-generating process using incomplete data and combines two easy
to implement statistical methods. In addition, the typical critique of the algorithm, its slow
convergence rate, is not problematic in this setting due to the size of both the frequency and
cross section dimensions which allow for consistent initial estimates using the standard or
iterative PCA techniques described in Stock and Watson (2002).


4     Estimating the model
    As described above, the EM algorithm utilizes the Kalman filter and smoother in order to
obtain the sufficient statistics necessary to re-estimate the system’s matrices using standard
ordinary least squares techniques. Due to the irregular observation of the data in our frame-
work, two extensions to the standard Kalman recursion equations need to be made. The
first alteration involves setting up the Kalman filter to deal with missing values as discussed
by Durbin and Koopman (2001). The second modification involves including additional state
variables that evolve deterministically to properly adjust for the varying temporal aggrega-
tion properties of the mixed frequency data. Next, we give a brief summary of both of these
extensions to the standard filter as well as a more explicit formulation of the state-space
system matrices and the EM algorithm.

4.1    Missing Value Kalman Filter
     Because of the aforementioned irregularity of observation in our data-set, as one moves
through time, the vector of observables (denoted yt ), changes size from period to period.
Figure 1 summarizes this pattern of data availability. The early part of the sample is dom-
inated by quarterly and monthly variables. The number of weekly variables grows steadily
from the mid-1980’s through the end of the sample. Nineteen series span the entire sample
period (1971–2010), while the shortest series begins in 2009.
     Consequently, as one proceeds through the Kalman filter and smoother, to accommodate
the partially observed vector yt? in the data one must use the known matrix Wt whose rows
are a subset of the rows of I(N̂ ) (such that yt? = Wt yt ) to alter the system matrices at that
particular point in time. Taking this Wt as given, the system matrices Z and H become
Z ? = Wt Z and H ? = Wt HWt0 , respectively. Substituting these matrices into the standard
filter and smoother equations allows one to proceed as usual through the recursive equations
outlined in the appendix.

4.2    Temporal aggregation and the Harvey Accumulator
   Another unique characteristic that results from the irregular frequency of observation is
the different temporal aggregations inherent in our data-set. By applying the accumulator
of Harvey (1989), one can manage this data irregularity with relative ease. The goal of


                                               5
the accumulator is to augment the state with a deterministically evolving indicator that is a
summary of all past values of the unobserved factor aggregated in such a way as to correspond
with the nature of the series observed at a frequency differing from the base frequency.
    More specifically, variables viewed as a “stock”, or a snap shot in time, will not need such
aggregation of past realizations of the factor. Variables that correspond to sums or averages
over the higher base frequency, however, will need to accumulate all the higher frequency
factor realizations over that period in order to properly account for the contemporaneous
factor’s contribution to what is being observed.6 Any “stocks” that are differenced can be
interpreted as sum variables and treated as such.
    Our data-set includes both variables that resemble “sums” as well as “averages,” in ad-
dition to indicators that are first differenced. Combining this with the weekly, monthly and
quarterly frequencies of observations, our particular model will need three Harvey accumu-
lators in the state.7

Sum Variables Accumulator
    For both the monthly and quarterly sums accumulator we follow Aruoba et al. (2009)’s
implementation of the Harvey (1989) accumulator. The accumulators for sum variables will
be denoted St . By construction, any sum accumulator should represent the current sum of all
of the factor realizations (base frequency) that have occurred within the current period of the
lower frequency of observation. Additionally, the accumulator should be defined recursively
so as to be included in the state space equations of (2)-(3). Analytically, the sum accumulator
evolves each period by the following equation:


                                            St = st St−1 + αt
    where st is a calendar determined indicator that evolves according to:
                
                    0 if t is the first period (base frequency) within the lower frequency
       st =
                    1 otherwise
   For notational purposes, it is assumed in what follows that αt is an AR(1) process defined
by αt+1 = ραt + Rηt . Incorporating this representation of the accumulator into the state
space model follows from a simple substitution of the contemporaneous factor as outlined
by Aruoba et al. (2009).
   6
     Variables have different interpretations of how they are accumulated over the period of time they are
observed. Some, such as monthly corporate bond issuance, represent sums of the higher frequency (in
this case weekly issuance). Other variables, like Citigroup’s monthly asset-backed security yield spread,
represent averages of the higher frequency (weekly spreads). Ultimately, this difference will lead to a different
construction of the accumulator.
   7
     One does not need a Harvey accumulator for series that are observed at a weekly (the base) frequency,
as well as any series that are stocks. In our data-set we have an accumulator for (1) monthly averages (2)
monthly sums and (3) quarterly sums.


                                                       6
Average Variables Accumulator
   For the purposes of exposition, we will denote the desired accumulator for the average
variables with Mt , and derive it as though we are aggregating from a weekly base frequency to
monthly observations of the financial indicators.8 By construction, this accumulator should
represent the current average of all of the factor realizations (occurring every week) that
have occurred within the current month (frequency that is being observed) and be defined
recursively for seamless addition to the state space equations of (2)-(3). Analytically, the
average accumulator evolves each period by the following equation:

                                                  (mt − 1)Mt−1 + αt
                                       Mt =
                                                         mt
    where mt is a calendar determined indicator that evolves:

                               
                                1    if t is the first week of the month
                       mt    =   2    if t is the second week of the month
                                 etc.
                               

   Explicitly including the accumulator in the state requires augmenting the state and some
substitution. The resulting formulation is given by:

                                                                                  
                             αt               ρ       0          αt−1               R
                                      =       ρ     mt −1                   +       R        ηt−1
                             Mt               mt     mt          Mt−1               mt


4.3     EM Algorithm
    At each iteration of the EM algorithm, one pass through the Kalman filter and smoother
is made using the system matrices Z, H, T, Q, P1 and a1 as well as the Harvey accumulator
and missing observation extensions. By utilizing both the smoothed estimates and their
covariance matrices, one can update the expectation of the conditional loglikelihood function;
the (E) step. Then, using OLS techniques, the system matrices are re-estimated; the (M)
step. This process will yield a non-decreasing sequence of log-likelihood values. A concise
version of the log-likelihood, and the one that can be computed at each iteration, is as follows:

                                                     T̂
                                            1X                     0   −1
                                  log L = −       (log |Ft? | + vt? Ft? vt? )                               (4)
                                            2 t=1
   8
     All methods outlined in this section generalize fully to any particular combination of base and observation
frequencies that one might encounter with the only necessary modifications occurring in the evolution of the
calendar indicator mt or st .


                                                            7
   Now that the (E) and (M) steps have been completely defined, one can iterate between
the two steps until (4) becomes stable.9 Further details of the algorithm can be found in the
appendix.


5     What is the FCI Capturing?
    Table 2 lists all of the 100 financial indicators in our FCI along with their stationary
transformations and estimated weights. The weights, or factor loadings, are a useful way of
interpreting the systemic relationship between the indicators in the index. With the large
approximate dynamic factor method as with PCA, the resulting index and weights are only
identified up to scale. To make the weights comparable to PCA, we have scaled each according
to the PCA convention that E(Λ0 Λ) = I.

5.1     Contributions to the FCI
    Credit risk measures tend to be positive contributors to the index, while money and
credit aggregates and measures of leverage tend to be negative contributors. This pattern of
increasing risk premia and declining credit volumes and leverage is consistent with tightening
financial conditions and provides the basis for the FCI’s interpretation. The way in which
leverage enters the index may seem counterintuitive, but is in line with the findings of Adrian
and Shin (2009) that leverage is procyclical. In this way, the process of deleveraging appears
in the FCI as an indicator of deteriorating financial conditions.
    Without index dynamics, it is not possible to fully capture the risk inherent in the build-
up of leverage. Our dynamic framework relaxes this constraint allowing the procyclical nature
of leverage to be reflected in the estimated dynamic process for the index. A large build-up
of leverage that pushes the index well below its sample mean will generate a tendency to
reverse this decline that depends on the estimated degree of mean reversion.
    Taking into account the financial markets represented in our FCI, we have segmented our
100 financial indicators into three categories: Money Markets (28), Debt/Equity Markets
(27), and the Banking System (45). Measures of the health of the banking system capture
41 percent of the variation in the data explained by the FCI, followed by money market
measures at 30 percent and debt and equity markets at 28 percent.
    The Money Markets category is comprised mostly of interbank, repo, swap, and commer-
cial paper spreads and is the basis of most other financial conditions indices. These measures
primarily capture credit risk and liquidity. Some of the biggest contributors to the FCI in
this category include the 2-year swap and TED spreads as well as the 1-month nonfinancial
A2P2/AA commercial paper credit spread and repo market volume. The latter two variables
   9
     As a convergence criterion we used | log L(k)−log L(k−1)/((log L(k)+log L(k−1))/2)| < 10−6 . Important
to note, though, is that because the initial estimates are consistent, the EM algorithm converges rather
quickly; within 150 iterations.



                                                    8
are fairly unique to our FCI, as are the measures of open interest in money market derivatives
that we include in this category.
    In the Debt/Equity Markets group are mostly equity and bond price measures. In terms of
equity prices, the largest weights are given to the index of volatility for the S&P 500, the VIX,
and the relative price of financial stocks in the S&P 500. Like Hatzius et al. (2010), we also
include here residential and commercial real estate prices and measures of stock market cap-
italization. In terms of bond prices, the index covers corporate, municipal, and asset-backed
bond markets. Bond spreads like the high yield/Baa corporate and financial/corporate enter
strongly here with large positive weights, but so do non-mortgage, mortgage, and commercial
mortgage asset-backed bond spreads and credit default swap spreads tied to corporate bonds.
    The Banking system category is comprised mainly of survey-based measures of credit
availability and the assets and liabilities of commercial and “shadow” banks. The Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey questions on commercial bank loan spreads and standards all
enter strongly into the index as do several other measures of business and consumer credit
conditions. The Credit Derivatives Research Counterparty Risk index measured as the aver-
age of the credit default swap spreads of the largest 14 issuers of CDS contracts also receives
a large weight in this category, with the remaining weight split roughly evenly between mea-
sures of asset quality and measures of commercial and “shadow” bank lending and leverage.

5.2    Comparisons with other indexes
    It is important to keep in mind that the estimated factor loadings are not unique. The
same estimated index may have more than one set of weights that are consistent with it.
Therefore, to make comparisons it is best to compare the indices, themselves. To establish a
reference scale for the index, in what follows we have expressed it relative to its sample mean
and standard deviation. A zero value is, thus, equivalent to the sample mean, and deviations
from zero are measured in standard deviation units.
    Figure 2 compares our FCI against the USMPFFCI and KCFSI. All three indexes tell
a similar overall story: the 1970’s and 80’s were a particularly stressful period for financial
markets that only recent years can match in magnitude. Compared to the USMPFFCI,
the differences with the FCI are most considerable in the recent period with much of this
attributable to the FCI’s broader coverage of high frequency data on securitized debt, repo,
and derivatives markets.
    In contrast, the KCFSI is more similar to the FCI in the recent period, but with higher
peaks and valleys. This stems mostly from the fact that it weights more highly recent events
given the generally lower volatility of the index and its financial indicators post-1984. To
see this, consider figure 3 which depicts the KCFSI and the initial PCA estimate of the FCI
beginning in 1997. The initial estimate resembles the KCFSI to a high degree, although the
difference in data coverage is apparent even here at times.




                                               9
5.3     Comparisons across time
     Our method obtains a significant time series for the FCI just as Hatzius et al. (2010)
do for the UMPFFCI. One side effect of this is a much higher mean due to the volatility in
the 1970’s and 80’s that the longer indexes capture. This suggests that comparisons across
time using indices of shorter duration like the KCFSI may be biased. However, in some ways
they may also be more relevant. Financial markets since the early 1980’s have undergone
significant transformations. If the relationships between financial indicators have changed,
i.e. the weights have changed, then a shorter sample makes sense.
     To test this hypothesis, we also constructed the FCI using only data from the post-1984
period. Figure 4 plots both the shorter sample and full sample FCI.10 As with the KCFSI
and the FCI, for the period of time in which the two overlap most of the difference appears
in their levels. This suggests that it is primarily the lower volatility of the post-1984 period
that is driving what differences we do see, and is line with broader findings on the “Great
Moderation.”
     The factor loadings in table 2 confirm this with small differences between indexes for
most variables. However, the post-1984 index does shift around weight between the three
broad groups of financial indicators. Figure 5 displays the contribution of each of the these
groups to the total variance of the 100 financial indicators explained by the full and post-1984
sample indexes. One can see from this figure that the money market variables explain much
more of the post-1984 index with the extra weight shifted almost entirely from the banking
system group.

5.4     Comparisons across indicators
    An alternative to using a shorter sample period is to instead focus only on the subset of
financial indicators whose history extends back over most of the sample. In this way, we can
judge if it is possible to consistently capture financial conditions over an extended period
without incorporating information from more recently developed financial markets. Figure 6
plots the FCI computed from the 39 financial indicators in our data-set that extend back to
1978 against the 100-variable index over the same time period.
    One can see from both figure 6 and the factor loadings in table 2 that the smaller-variable
index is capturing something very different than the larger one. Except for the most recent
period where both indexes demonstrate large positive values, the two are highly negatively
correlated. Well-known periods of deterioration in financial conditions, such as the late 1970’s
and early 1980’s, appear in the narrower index as very loose periods for financial conditions.
In fact, looking at the factor loadings in table 2, many of them are of the opposite sign
compared to the weight given to the same variable in the 100-variable index.
    The above suggests several explanations for what may be confounding the estimation of
the smaller variable index in a way that does not appear in our larger variable FCI. First,
  10
   Just as with the full sample index, we do not consider the first two years of estimates so that the shorter
sample index begins in 1987. At this point, over 50 percent of the indicators have complete time series.


                                                     10
the 100-variable index appears to be spanning a space that is larger than the 39-variable
index. This is not surprising given what we know about financial development over the past
40 years and the greater inclusion of these financial markets in the larger index. Second, the
subset of indicators we have chosen for the smaller variable index contains a bias towards
those also more likely to be affected by the change in volatility post-1984. This can be seen
in the fact that many of the same indicators in the 39-variable index also show large changes
in their factor loadings in the post-1984 100-variable index.

5.5    Stability of the FCI
    As an example of where the smaller index seems to be going awry, consider the Treasury
yield curve indicators. Measures from both the short and long end of the curve get large
positive weights in the 39-variable index, meaning that as the yield curve steepens the index
rises. In contrast, the weight they receive in the larger 100-variable index is much smaller
and negative, meaning that as the yield curve steepens financial conditions tend to improve.
However, even this relationship is not stable over time. In the shorter sample 100-variable
index, the long end of the curve receives a large positive weight while the short end receives
a smaller negative weight.
    This pattern suggests to us that the instability over time and indicators described above is
due to changes in the level and volatility of economic growth and inflation. The high inflation,
high negative growth periods of the late 1970’s and early 1980’s suggest a correlation pattern
in the data that is counterintuitive to the low inflation, high negative growth period of the
recent crisis. The fact that the larger 100-variable index does not exhibit to the same degree
these problems over time suggests to us that it is spanning a space that is less sensitive to
the level of economic growth and inflation. However, it does still appear to be somewhat
influenced by the change in volatility post-1984.


6     Identifying “Financial Crises”
    The measure of financial conditions that we have constructed is not unlike a temperature
in a person. Consequently, one might expect to have to address some of the same issues faced
by medical practitioners in utilizing a patient’s temperature in a diagnosis. Specifically, (1)
what is a “normal” level and subsequently a level that would warrant concern?; (2) are the
risks associated with both extremely low values and high values the same? ; and (3) how well
does this measure predict the true underlying state of the patient? By implementing Markov-
swithcing and receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curve techniques, we will attempt to
address each of these issues.
    What proves to be a “normal” temperature in a person often tends to be a range rather
then a particular value. Similarly, it makes sense to consider that what constitutes a “normal”
value for financial conditions could also be a range as well as something that might change
over time. In practice, redefining normal for every person, or in this context point in time,

                                              11
would be counterproductive. Instead, the average across the population is usually a suitable
starting point.
    Because we have already standardized the FCI to have a mean of zero and unit variance,
a value of zero seems a reasonable place to initially deem as normal. It captures the average
level of financial conditions in our sample, and corresponds to a weighted average of measures
of risk, liquidity, and leverage all expressed relative to their average levels over the same time
period. In an attempt to build a “range of normal,” it is common to simply select some
number of standard deviations from the sample mean, or, equivalently, “build the range” by
including everything that falls within a desired percentage of the population.
    A possible source of bias in this kind of reasoning, however, might result if a priori we
believe that some members of that population are in fact “really sick” and their temperatures
are skewed as a result. Including these members when calculating the average will reduce
the power of this metric to distinguish between states of the world, i.e. a “healthy state”
and a “sick state”. For us, the “really sick state” conforms with the notion of a financial
crisis, where a number of financial indicators are deviating substantially from their historical
norms. Ideally, we would want to develop the concept of normal for the FCI with some sort
of reference to these different segments of the population.
    If we envision every week in our sample as many different patients, some “sick” and some
“normal,” and their particular value of the FCI as their “temperature” we can begin to
build the intuition behind an optimal range or value for normal. Ideally, we would have a
professional consensus on which of these patients turned out to be in fact “sick” and “normal”,
much like NBER produces for recessions and expansions. Unfortunately, what we have to
resort to is the historical accounts of various financial events in U.S. history over the sample
period we examine.
    Table 3 provides a list of 5 financial crisis episodes in U.S. financial history over the last
40 years along with some of the major events that occurred during each of them. It will be
these episodes that we take as given as the “sick” members of the population. In general,
they are associated with periods of high risk premia, low liquidity, and declining leverage.
To arrive at these episodes, we conducted a survey of the literature on banking and financial
crises over the past 40 years. The dating of each of the five episodes is our interpretation of
the consensus in the literature as to the beginning and ends of each crisis.11
    As a robustness check on the validity of these episodes, we begin by using a Markov-
switching model to estimate a two state model of financial conditions and the probabilities of
each state. Ultimately, the interpretation of the two states estimated by the Markov-switching
model is ambiguous, but the identifying restrictions we impose will help to characterize one
state as a “crisis period.” Because we avoid using the state probabilities estimated to define
our financial episodes explicitly, similarity in the dates of high crisis probability to the ones
used to define our crisis episodes lend some credibility to the threshold policy analysis that
will follow.
  11
    Some examples include: FDIC (1984), FDIC (1997), Laeven and Valencia (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff
(2008), Minsky (1986), Spero (1999), Schreft (1990), Cameron (2008), and El-Gamal and Jaffe (2008)



                                                12
                                                     µSt   ςSt
                                         State 1    -0.01 0.00
                                         State 2    0.18 0.01
                                         State 3    -0.01 0.01

                 Table 1: Estimated parameters from Markov-switching model


6.1     Markov-switching model of financial conditions
    Taking the estimated FCI as given, we estimate a variant of the Markov-switching model
of Hamilton (1989) to characterize changes over time in the mean and variance of the index.
It will be assumed that there are three states of the world, denoted by St ∼ {St = 1, St =
2, St = 3}. Equation (5) defines the univariate time series specification used in our estimation
of the Markov-switching model


                                      Ft (I − A(L)) = µSt + εt                                         (5)

    where εt ∼ N (0, ςSt ) and St denotes the three states of the world. In this particular
specification, the FCI (Ft ) will have some finite ordered dynamics that are state in-variant,
A(L), while the mean and variance of the errors of the FCI will vary by state, µSt and ςSt ,
respectively.12
    As noted earlier, our interpretation of the state that represents “really sick” patients is
characterized by periods of high risk premia, low liquidity, and deleveraging. In the context
of the Markov-switching model, we would expect that if in fact the states that the model is
distinguishing conform with this interpretation, a “high mean, high variance” state would
emerge. In terms of estimation, there is no restriction that these parameters would have to
be grouped in this way. Given what we found above concerning the reduction in volatility
post-1984, we also want to allow for a third state that could potentially be a combination of
the other two.
    Table 1 displays the mean and variance estimated for each of the three states. In fact, with
a mean of -0.01 and variance of 0.00 for state 2, and a mean of 0.18 and variance of 0.01 for
state 1, the Markov-switching model separately identifies a high mean, high variance and a
low mean, low variance state. The third state has the same mean as state 1 and the same
variance as state 2 consistent with the notion of a high volatility state at a lower mean due
to the overall lower volatility in the post-1984 period.
    Figure 7 plots the FCI in panel A where the shading indicates the particular crisis episodes
found in table 3. The estimated probability of what we refer to as the crisis state, state 2, is
shown through the entire sample in panel B. It is clear from figure 7 that what we are calling
  12
    We use three lags of the FCI in the estimation that follows, although results are qualitatively similar
with four lags instead. Substantial loss of degrees of freedom prevents the use of more than four lags.


                                                    13
a crisis state coincides closely with the crisis episodes of table 3. During the majority of these
episodes, the probability of a crisis state is quite high, particularly surrounding their peak
events. The prominent exception is the fourth episode where volatility was higher, but at a
lower level. This episode should, however, be picked up by the third state that accommodates
this possibility.
    Panel C displays the combined probability of states 2 and 3 through the entire sample. The
fourth episode is indeed classified as a crisis period under this broader definition. However, so
are several other periods outside of the episodes we consider.13 Almost all of these instances
occur in the period post-1984 as one would expect given the parameter estimates above and
our previous subsample results for the index.
    A particularly interesting period where states 2 and 3 receive a high probability is the
2002-2007 period. State 2’s probability during this period is essentially zero, but state 3
receives a very high probability on more than one occasion despite the fact that the index
during this period changes very little over time. This period, in other words, confounds our
model. The persistently negative values of the FCI during this time are consistent with state
3 in that they have a similar mean to state 1, and the variance during this period is only
marginally different than several other instances of where there is a high probability of state
2.
    This result is interesting in two respects. First, because it may indicate that state invariant
dynamics are not reasonable in this case. More interesting, however, is the fact that this is
the period leading up to the most recent crisis. The model may be signaling something
very different about this period, i.e. that financial conditions below their historical average
for a significant period of time may contain information on future crises. It would not be
unreasonable to imagine a “sickness” that was instead linked closer to periods of low risk, high
liquidity, and increasing leverage. This particular interpretation we leave to future research.

6.2     Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) curve analysis
    The above results provide some justification for the broad categorical descriptions of
different periods in U.S. financial history in table 3. Here, we develop a unique threshold
rule that will be used to identify the “crisis” state of financial conditions in real-time based
on past instances of U.S. financial crises. To do so, we follow the approach used by Berge
and Òscar Jordà (2009) in estimating optimal threshold values for common business cycle
indicators including the Chicago Fed National Activity Index.

The Social Planner’s Utility Function
   The nonparametric estimation strategy of Berge and Òscar Jordà (2009) requires that we
categorize each observed value of the FCI as a “crisis” or “non-crisis” period as in table 3
  13
    Most of these instances include major events that were excluded from the other episodes for various
reasons. In fact, it would be rather easy to group the mid 1980’s and early 1990’s with the third episode
encompassing the S&L crisis.


                                                   14
and then place relative weights on the utility from correctly predicting each of these states
and the disutility from making a false positive versus false negative evaluation of the state of
financial conditions. By varying these relative utility and disutility weights, we can develop
boundaries for the index corresponding with competing alternatives for addressing the state
of future financial conditions.
    Keep in mind, however, that this analysis remains subject to the Lucas critique in that
it holds fixed both the reaction of financial markets to past policy and past policy to past
financial market events. At best, what it can answer is only what level of the index has
been associated with crisis conditions in the past. Only a fully articulated model of the
financial system and the policy process can tell you how both policymakers and financial
market participants may respond to current and future events. Presumably, however, even
such a model would take account of past responses which is what we detail here.
    Consider the derivation in Berge and Òscar Jordà (2009),


                                 T P (c) = P [Ft ≥ c||St = 1]                                  (6)
                                 F P (c) = P [Ft ≥ c||St = 0]                                  (7)

   with St ∈ {0, 1} indicating the non-crisis and crisis states of financial conditions, re-
spectively. T P (c) is typically referred to as the true positive, sensitivity, or recall rate, and
F P (c) is known as the false positive or 1-specificity rate. The relationship between the
two is described by the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve. With the Cartesian
convention, this curve is given by


                                      {ROC(r), r}1r=0                                          (8)

    where ROC(r) = T P (c) and r = F P (c). Figure 8 depicts this curve and calculates the
area under the curve for the FCI using the crisis periods in table 3. The closer to one the
area under the curve the more predictive the index is of these periods.
    The social planner’s utility function for the classification of the FCI at each point in time
as a crisis or non-crisis period is expressed as in Baker and Kramer (2007),


        U = U11 ROC(r)π + U01 (1 − ROC(r))π + U10 r(1 − π) + U00 (1 − r)(1 − π)                (9)

    where Uij is the utility (or disutility) associated with the prediction i given that the true
state is j, i, j ∈ {0, 1} and π is the unconditional probability of observing a crisis episode in
the sample. Utility maximization implies that the optimal threshold value c is given by,

                                  ∂ROC          U00 − U10 1 − π
                                           =                                                  (10)
                                   ∂r           U11 − U01 π

                                                15
    that is the point where the slope of the ROC curve equals the expected marginal rate of
substitution between the net utility of accurate crisis and non-crisis episode prediction.
    Essentially, in this type of policy analysis one is weighing the costs of a Type I ver-
sus Type II error relative to the benefits of correctly predicting the true state. This intu-
itively amounts to deciding on whether one wants to put more emphasis (in utility terms)
on correctly identifying either state, or possibly equal weight to both. An example of as-
signing equal weight to both identifying crisis and non-crisis episodes would be assigning
U00 = U11 = 1, U01 = U10 = −1.
    On the other hand, if one wanted to put all the emphasis on correctly identifying financial
crises, and subsequently no emphasis on the likely error of identifying the other state as a
crisis, we could assign the utilities this way: U00 = 0, U11 = 1, U01 = −1, U10 = − where
 needs to be small but non-zero in order to prevent the policy utility function from being
degenerate. Finally, a threshold rule that puts more emphasis on identifying non-crisis periods
could be identified by using a utility function defined this way: U00 = 1, U11 = 0, U01 =
−, U10 = −1.
    The optimal thresholds defined above form a particular subset of the estimated index
values consistent with three parameterizations of the level sets of the social planner’s utility
function. Graphically, each policy attempts to find the unique intersection of the linear utility
function with the convex ROC curve. A policy placing a very steep penalty on missing an
occurrence of a financial crisis thus looks to intersect the upward sloping portion of the ROC
curve. A policy that places a relatively larger penalty on missing an occurrence of a non-crisis
period does the opposite and instead intersects the flatter portion of the ROC curve. The
equal weight, or “unbiased”, policy falls somewhere in between the other two on the ROC
curve.
    Alternatively, consider the following thought experiment with regard to the FCI depicted
in figure 9. Draw a horizontal line across the graph at the highest value of the index that
does not fall in a period categorized as a crisis period. This defines the threshold for the
index that puts a very large weight on correctly identifying non-crisis episodes and avoiding
false positives. Similarly, draw a horizontal line across the graph at the lowest value of the
index that falls in a period of financial crisis. This defines a threshold which puts a very
large weight on correctly identifying non-crisis periods and avoiding false negatives.
    With relatively equal weight on all four utilities (disutilities), Berge and Òscar Jordà
(2009) derive a threshold value that balances the need to catch financial crisis periods in
advance with the desire to avoid assigning movements in the FCI at low levels to a financial
crisis. In essence, this derivation “rebases” the index based on the historical financial crises
we have identified so that the optimal threshold now takes on a similar meaning for the
probability of a crisis period that a zero value of the index does for historical financial
conditions. It will, however, be sensitive as to how we date periods of past financial crisis.
    We have found through trial and error that this sensitivity is not very high as long as
the beginning and end of the episodes are liberally defined. Small changes in the dating of
crisis episodes can have a big impact on the upper and lower thresholds defined above, but


                                               16
the equal weighting method tends to balance out these changes so that the optimal threshold
produced varies very little when the unconditional probability of a crisis is well defined. This
is somewhat reassuring given that in real-time it may be difficult to assess the beginning and
end of a new episode.

Interpreting the ROC thresholds
    Interestingly, a policy which equally weights the costs and benefits of identifying a crisis
episode suggests that even financial conditions slightly below their historical trend can be
associated with a financial crisis. The resulting threshold for the index in this case is a
negative number (-0.4). This result makes sense intuitively as it is very apparent in figure
9 that the transition in many cases into and out of a crisis episode is characterized by a
sudden and sharp deviation from below trend, often greater than a standard deviation in
size. Furthermore, as the index is currently defined, several of these episodes are preceded
by periods of persistently negative index values.
    In essence, the ROC analysis above suggests that the relevant baseline for financial condi-
tions based on historical crisis episodes is not necessarily the sample mean of the FCI. Given
what we found above in relation to the change in the mean of the FCI over time, this is
not surprising. However, one could also imagine a policy that puts more weight on avoiding
severe crises and less weight on crisis episodes like the third and the fourth in table 3. Here,
even though it remains sensitive to the dating of crisis episodes, the upper threshold value
may be a more relevant benchmark.
    Alternatively, one could consider the range between the equal weighted and upper thresh-
old as an early indicator of crisis financial conditions. We refer to this range in figure 9 as a
“Reactionary” policy for classifying financial conditions as it puts progressively more weight
on avoiding incorrectly classifying increasing levels of the FCI as indicating a crisis. A similar
definition can also be applied to the range of values between the lower and equal-weighted
thresholds. In this case, a “Pre-emptive” policy for classifying financial conditions would
put progressively more weight on avoiding missing the early signs of a financial crisis at low
levels of the FCI. The union of the two ranges can be considered as a “range of normal” in
the sense above that most instances of crisis and non-crisis weeks fall outside this range.
    It is helpful to consider what each of the above policies would have meant in hindsight
for the most recent crisis compared to others in the past. An unbiased policy first signals
the development of crisis conditions in August 2007 nearly in step with our dating. This is a
feature common to several of the crises we consider, although both the late 1970’s and 90’s
would have registered some false positives using this policy. In contrast, a reactive policy
would not have signaled concern until the summer of 2008, and not consistently until the
post-Lehman period. It also would have entirely avoided classifying the the 1998-2002 period
as a crisis. The latter is the only instance of a crisis where this would have been the case.
    Conversely, in the post-Lehman era the FCI remained in the region between the reactive
and unbiased policy until late 2009. Most recently, it has fluctuated within a small range
around this policy threshold suggesting financial conditions have returned to levels consistent

                                               17
in the past with non-crisis periods. For a brief period following the spring 2010 European
debt crisis, it once again breached this threshold, but subsequently has returned below it.
However, in contrast to the aftermath of all of the other episodes, it remains above its level
just prior to the crisis. As such, a pre-emptive policy would still classify its most recent
behavior as characteristic of crisis conditions.
    The “range of normal” interpretation, on the other hand, accords well with the Markov-
switching analysis. The periods of highest probability for both types of crises tend to fall
above a reactionary and below a pre-emptive policy. Not much is gained from the former,
but the latter is instructive. For instance, such a policy would have raised red flags several
times during the period from 2002-2007. The same can be said of the late 1970’s and early
1980’s, although it applies just as well to the mid-1990’s. Thus, although ROC analysis is
not very well suited for more than two states of financial conditions, it appears a case could
be made based on our results that they are consistent with the three states considered above.


7    Conclusion
   In this paper, we outlined the econometric methods needed to incorporate the most
general set of indicators necessary to build a real-time metric of financial conditions. To
provide evidence of its applicability, Markov-switching methods were used to evaluate the
index’s ability to capture well known financial crises in U.S history. Then, using ROC analysis
threshold rules were developed to help predict future crises based on the level of the index
during past crises and subjective utility weights.




                                              18
References
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2009). Liquidity and leverage. FRB of New York Staff Re-
 port (328).
Aruoba, S. B., F. X. Diebold, and C. Scotti (2009). Real-time measurement of business
  conditions. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 27 (4), 417–427.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2002). Determining the number of factors in approximate factor models.
  Econometrica 70 (1), 191–221.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2004). A panic attack on unit roots and cointegration. Econometrica 72 (4),
  1127–1177.
Baker, S. G. and B. S. Kramer (2007). Peirce, youden, and receiver operating characteristic
  curves. The American Statistician 61 (4), 343–346.
Berge, T. J. and Òscar Jordà (2009). The classification of economic activity. UC Davis
  Working Paper , 1–41.
Cameron, A. S. (2008). Financial crises: Recent experience in u.s. and international markets.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 395–422.
Doz, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2006). A quasi maximum likelihood approach for large
 approximate dynamic factor models. European Central Bank Working Paper Series (674),
 1–35.
Durbin, J. and S. J. Koopman (2001). Time Series Analysis by State Space Methods. Oxford
 University Press.
El-Gamal, M. A. and A. M. Jaffe (2008). Energy, financial contagion, and the dollar. Rice
  University Institute for Public Policy Working Paper Series.
FDIC (1984). The First Fifity Years: A History of the FDIC 1933-1983. Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation.
FDIC (1997). History of the Eighties – Lessons for the Future. Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation.
Hakkio, C. S. and W. R. Keeton (2009). Financial stress: What is it, how can it be measured,
  and why does it matter? Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review 1, 5–50.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989). A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time
  series and the business cycle. Econometrica 57 (2), 357–384.
Harvey, A. (1989). Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter. Cam-
  bridge University Press.

                                             19
Hatzius, J., P. Hooper, F. Mishkin, K. L. Schoenholtz, and M. W. Watston (2010). Financial
  condition indexes: A fresh look after the financial crisis. US Monetary Policy Forum Paper
  Series.

Illing, M. and Y. Liu (2006). Measuring financial stress in a developed country: An applica-
   tion to canada. Journal of Financial Stablity 2 (3), 243–265.

Laeven, L. and F. Valencia (2008). Systemic banking crises: A new database. IMF Working
  Paper (224).

Minsky, H. (1986). Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University Press.

Nelson, W. R. and R. Perli (2007). Selected indicators of financial stability. Irving Fisher
  Committee’s Bulletin on Central Bank Statistics 23, 92–105.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2008). This time is different: A panoramic view of eight
  centuries of financial crises. NBER Working Paper (13882).

Schreft, S. L. (1990). Credit controls. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review ,
  25–55.

Shumway, R. H. and D. S. Stoffer (1982). An approach to time series smoothing and fore-
  casting using the em algorithm. Journal of Time Series Analysis 3 (4), 253–264.

Spero, J. E. (1999). The Failure of Franklin National Bank: Challenge to the International
  Banking System. Beard Books.

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1999). Forecasting inflation. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 44 (2), 293–335.

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2002). Forecasting using principal components from a large
  number of predictors. Journal of the American Statistcal Association 97 (460), 1167–1179.

Watson, M. W. and R. F. Engle (1983). Alternative algorithms for the estimation of dynamic
 factor, mimic and varying coefficient regression models. Journal of Econometrics (23),
 385–400.




                                            20
A         Appendix
A.1        Kalman Filter and Smoother Recursive Equations
    The Kalman filter and smoother equations are a standard tool for producing forecasts
and smoothed estimates of state-space models. Combined with the assumption of Gaussian
errors, it can be shown that the recursive equations of the filter will yield the minimum mean-
squared error estimate within the class of linear estimators. In this paper, we will adopt the
notation of Durbin and Koopman (2001) and define the Kalman filter equations as follows.14
    With a1 and P1 given, the filter equations are

                            vt = yt − Zat        Ft = ZPt Z 0 + H
                            Kt = Tt Pt Z 0 Ft−1  Lt = Tt − Kt Z
                            at+1 = Tt at + Kt vt Pt+1 = Tt Pt L0t + RQR0

       The equations for the backwards smoother are given by15 :

                      rt−1 = Z 0 Ft−1 vt + L0t rt    Nt−1 = Z 0 Ft−1 Z + L0t Nt Lt
                      α̃t = at + Pt rt−1             Vt = Pt − Pt Nt−1 Pt
                      Jt = Pt−1 L0t−1 (I − Nt−1 Pt )

       with rT̂ = 0, and NT̂ = 0.

A.2        Building the state
    This section gives a more detailed explanation of how to build the system matrices of the
state space, as well as how to obtain the initial estimates needed to begin the EM algorithm.
The unobserved factor is assumed to have some finite order dynamics p? . Using standard OLS
techniques on a PCA estimated version of the factor Ft◦ , an initial guess of these dynamics
are generated and described by vector ρ◦ .16 Augmenting the state to include p? lags of Ft
yields the following state equation, with αt = [Ft−i ] for i = 0, . . . , p? − 1:

                                                               
                                               ρ                               
                           αt+1 =             ?                     αt +       1 ηt
                                           I(p − 1) 0p? −1×1

       Now, specifying
  14
     For more details on the derivation of these equations, see (Durbin and Koopman, 2001, 64–73).
  15
     It should be noted that the additional matrix Jt , is being calculated so that the maximization step in
the EM algorithm can be defined more easily.
  16
     The BIC criterion was used on the initial guess of the factor from the cross-sectional PCA method to
determine the number of lags to be 15.



                                                    21
                                                                   
                                                   ρ
                                    T̃ =
                                               I(p? − 1) 0p? −1×1

    one can augment the state (currently a p? long vector), by the additional states needed
for each of the accumulators derived in section (4.2) to yield the state equation (taking the
ρ dynamics above as given):

                                                                                     
                                                                         1
                  αt       T̃                  0   0 0     αt−1      0p? −1×1 
                 Mt  =  ρ               mt −1
                                                   0 0   Mt−1  +      1
                                                                                ηt−1                   (11)
                           mt               mt                                
                  St                                       St−1          m
                           ρ                   0   st 0                    t
                                                                          1

    It should be noted that as written above the T̃ within the general transition system ma-
trix, T , here is time invariant, and subsequently the dynamics being estimated (essentially a
re-estimation of ρ) at each iteration of the EM algorithm are from a time invariant system.
However, our (accumulator augmented) state transition system matrix (as well as the coeffi-
cient matrix on the ηt ) does vary over time due to the different number of weeks in a given
month, mt , or quarter, qt , which also must be carried in the state vector for our purposes.
    Moving to the measurement equation, assume that a priori the vector of factor loadings for
each series Λ is known.17 Then, taking the state equation (11) as given, the Z measurement
system matrix is simply a N̂ by p? + 3 matrix, where each row has the particular loading λi
in either the first column (if it corresponded with a weekly or stock variable) or one of the
last three columns (corresponding to one of the accumulators i.e. monthly average, monthly
sum, or quarterly sum) and zeros everywhere else. The initial guess of H is the diagonal
matrix of the variances of the residuals from the initial PCA estimate of the factor, σi I(N̂ ).18

A.3      The EM Algorithm defined
    Now that the system matrices have all been defined, the EM algorithm’s updates of each
of these system matrices can be explicitly defined. With initial estimates of Z, H, and T,
we can begin to run algorithm to obtain the maximum likelihood estimates of each. The
log-likelihood function for the complete set of data α1 , . . . , αT̂ , y1 , . . . , yT̂ can be written in
the form19
  17
     The initial guess of these loadings, Λ◦ , will in fact be the loadings obtained from the PCA estimate of
the factor mentioned above.
  18
     The lack of identification that is common to these models requires that we restrict the scale of either
the factor loadings, as in PCA, or the factor. We use the normalization of Doz et al. (2006) and restrict the
variance of the state disturbances to be 1 to set the scale of the factor.
  19
     In what follows, we drop the R matrix in the notation of the log-likelihood for notational convenience.
Due to the fact that there is only one factor and that one is not estimating the dynamics or variances of the
deterministic accumulators, this has no substantive implications.


                                                      22
                        1            1
              log L = − log |P1 | − (α1 − a1 )0 P1 (α1 − a1 )
                        2            2
                                            T̂
                        T̂ − 1           1X
                      −        log |Q| −       (αt − T αt−1 )0 Q−1 (αt − T αt−1 )
                           2             2 t=2
                                         T̂
                           T̂         1X
                          − log |H| −       (yt − Zαt )0 H −1 (yt − Zαt )                    (12)
                           2          2 t=1

    In order to calculate the conditional expectation defined in the log-likelihood function,
it is convenient to define the conditional mean and covariance of the state given all of the
observed data from the Kalman smoother recursive equations: the covariance matrix of αt
and αt−1 being the additional equation in the Kalman smoother mentioned before.


                                        E(αt |y1 , . . . , yT̂ ) = α̃t                       (13)
                                     cov(αt |y1 , . . . , yT̂ ) = Vt                         (14)
                                cov(αt , αt−1 |y1 , . . . , yT̂ ) = Jt0                      (15)

   Now, taking conditional expectations yields:

                                              1            1
G(a1 , P1 , T, Z, Q, H|y1 , . . . , yT̂ ) = − log |P1 | − tr {P1 (V1 + (α̃1 − a1 )(α̃1 − a1 )0 )}
                                              2            2
                                              T̂ − 1          1 
                                            −        log |Q| − tr Q−1 (C − BT 0 − T B 0 + T AT 0 )
                                                 2            2
                                              T̂           1
                                            − log |H| − tr H −1 (F − EZ 0 − ZE 0 + ZDZ 0 ) (16)
                                                              
                                              2            2
   where tr denotes trace and

                          PT̂ −1
                                  (Vi + α̃i α̃i0 )   D = T̂i=1 (Vi + α̃i α̃i0 )
                                                        P
                       A = i=1
                       B = T̂i=2 (Jt0 + α̃i α̃i−1
                                              0
                                                   ) E = T̂i=1 (yi? α̃i? )
                          P                             P
                                                                        0
                       C = T̂i=2 (Vi + α̃i α̃i0 )    F = T̂i=1 (yi? yi? )
                          P                             P


   It should be noted that yi? and α̃t? denotes only using periods in which yt is observed.
Now taking the partial derivative with respect to each of the system matrices T, Z and H of
the conditional expectation log-likelihood yields the following updating equations for each of
the system matrices.



                                                  23
EM Updating Equation 1. The new estimate for the transition matrix T 0 that maximizes
the conditional loglikelihood function in (16) is given by:

                                         T 0 = BA−1

EM Updating Equation 2. The new estimate for the observation equation matrix Z 0 that
maximizes the conditional loglikelihood function in (16) is given by:

                                         Z 0 = ED−1

    While the above equations derive estimates for an unrestricted coefficient matrix, in our
particular model every indicator only loads onto one particular element in the state; either
the contemporaneous value of the factor or one of the accumulators. Subsequently, one can
estimate each particular loading in Z 0 by running individual OLS regressions. If one selects
the particular row in both the yt? and α̃t? matrices when constructing E and D, which become
scalars, then the particular loading λij for indicator i which loads onto the j state variable
                               E
that gets put into Z will be Dijj .
    For the purposes of defining the new estimate H 0 , taking into account this restriction on
the coefficient matrix Z, it will make sense to define each of the N̂ elements along the diagonal
of H separately. With new estimates of λij , the expected log-likelihood with respect to H
can be separated into N̂ different equations with the optimal value of Hi for the indicator i
that loads onto state variable j defined as:

EM Updating Equation 3. The new estimates for each of the elements in the diagonal
matrix H 0 that maximizes the conditional loglikelihood function in (16) is given by:
                                             1
                                   Hi0 =           (yi? − λi α̃j,t
                                                               ? 2
                                                                   )
                                            T̂ ?
Where the ? denotes one only includes observations and estimates of the state for periods
that the indicators are observed and adjusts the scalar T̂ accordingly.

    Finally, for a1 the loglikelihood is maximized by updating this parameter to the smoothed
estimate α̃1 . For the update of P1 , we follow Shumway and Stoffer (1982) by initializing it
at some reasonable baseline level. Now, the EM algorithm for our dynamic factor model
is complete with the extensions of handling missing observations and temporal aggregation
issues in the underlying data.




                                                 24
     (all of the financial indicators are in basis points or percentages)      LV: Level                                  1: Money Markets
                                                                               LVMA: Level relative to MA                 2: Debt/Equity Markets
                                                                               DLV: First Difference                      3: Banking System
                                                                               DLN: Log First Difference
                                                                               DLNQ: 13-week Log Difference


     Financial Indicator                                                              Transformation          Frequency                       Haver/Bloomberg*/Call Report^ Mnemonic     Start Category Full Sample Post-1984 39-variable Index
     1-month Nonfinancial CP A2P2/AA credit spread                                          LV                    W                                          FAP1M-FCP1M                1997w2    1        2.255      2.213
     2-year Swap/Treasury yield spread                                                      LV                    W                                         T111W2-R111G2              1987w14    1        2.229      2.424
     3-month TED spread (LIBOR-Treasury)                                                    LV                    W                                          FLOD3-FTBS3               1980w23    1         1.825     3.066
     1-month Merrill Lynch Options Volatility Expectations (MOVE)                           LV                    W                                              SPMLV1                1988w15    1        1.690      1.551
     3-month Merrill Lynch Swaption Volatiltiy Expectations (SMOVE)                         LV                    W                                             SPMLSV3                1996w49    1        1.678      1.008
     3-month/1-week AA Financial CP spread                                                  LV                    W                                          FFP3M-FFP7D                1997w2    1        1.582      1.783
     1-month Asset-backed/Financial CP credit spread                                        LV                    W                                          FAB1M-FFP1M                2001w1    1        1.581      1.996
     3-month Eurodollar spread (LIBID-Treasury)                                             LV                    W                                            FDB3-FTBS3               1971w2    1        1.522      3.200         -1.851
     On-the-run vs. Off-the-run 10-year Treasury liquidity premium                          LV                    W                                         FYCEPA-FCM10                1985w1    1        0.974      0.494
     10-year Swap/Treasury yield spread                                                     LV                    W                                         T111WA-R111GA              1987w14    1        0.845      0.947
     3-month Financial CP/Treasury bill spread                                              LV                    W                                            FFP3-FTBS3               1971w1    1         0.619     2.919         -0.430
     Fed Funds/Overnight Treasury Repo rate spread                                          LV                    W                                        FFED-RPGT01D*               1991w21    1        0.495      1.041
     3-month OIS/Treasury yield spread                                                      LV                    W                                       T111W3M-R111G3M              2003w38    1        0.452      1.148
     Agency MBS Repo Delivery Failures Rate                                               DLNQ                    W                                     FDDM/(FDDM+FDTM)               1994w40    1        0.426      0.326
     1-year/1-month LIBOR spread                                                            LV                    W                                         FLOD1Y-FLOD1                1986w2    1        0.368      0.004
     Treasury Repo Delivery Fails Rate                                                    DLNQ                    W                                     FDDG/(FDDG+FDTG)               1994w40    1        0.307      0.542
     Agency Repo Delivery Failures Rate                                                   DLNQ                    W                                      FDDS/(FDDS+FDTS)              1994w40    1        0.168      0.289
     Fed Funds/Overnight Agency Repo rate spread                                            LV                    W                                        FFED-RPAG01D*               1991w21    1        0.150      0.545
     Corporate Securities Repo Delivery Failures Rate                                     DLNQ                    W                                      FDDC/(FDDC+FDTC)              2001w40    1        0.103      0.122
     Fed Funds/Overnight MBS Repo rate spread                                               LV                    W                                        FFED-RPMB01D*               1991w21    1        0.037      0.215
     10-year Constant Maturity Treasury yield                                              DLV                    W                                               FCM10                1971w2     1        -0.050    -0.126         -0.105
     Broker-dealer Debit Balances in Margin Accounts                                       DLN                    M                                               SPMD                  1971w5    1        -0.122    -0.267         0.061
     3-month/1-week Treasury Repo spread                                                    LV                    W                                      RPGT03M*-RPGT01W*             1991w21    1        -0.141     0.141
     2-year/3-month Treasury yield spread                                                   LV                    W                                          FYCEP2-FTBS3               1971w1    1        -0.237     0.242         1.264
     Commercial Paper Outstanding                                                          DLN                    W                                                FCPT                1995w45    1        -0.482    -0.486
     10-year/2-year Treasury yield spread                                                   LV                    W                                        FYCEPA-FYCEP2               1971w34    1        -0.706    -0.375          3.704
     3-month Eurodollar, 10-year/3-month swap, 2-year and 10-year Treasury Optio          DLNQ                    W                            COPED3P+COPTN2P+COPT10P+COPIRSP          2002w7    1        -1.024    -0.802
     Total Repo Market Volume (Repurchases+Reverse Repurchases)                           DLNQ                    W                                           FDFR+FDFV                1994w40    1        -1.331    -1.078
     Citigroup Global Markets ABS/5-year Treasury yield spread                              LV                    M                                          SYCAAB-FCM5               1989w52    2        2.487      2.708
     Bloomberg 5-year AAA CMBS spread to Treasuries                                         LV                    W                                           CMBSAAA5*                1996w27    2        2.234      1.574
     Merrill Lynch High Yield/Moody's Baa corporate bond yield spread                       LV                    W                                          FMLHY-FBAA                 1997w2    2        2.116      1.252
     CBOE S\&P 500 Volatility Index (VIX)                                                   LV                    W                                               SPVIX                 1990w1    2        2.074      1.811




25
     Credit Derivatives Research North America Investment Grade Index                       LV                    W                                              S009LIG                2006w1    2        1.528      1.015
     Credit Derivatives Research North America High Yield Index                             LV                    W                                             S009LHY                 2006w1    2        1.516      0.972
     Citigroup Global Markets Financial/Corporate Credit bond spread                        LV                    M                                            SYCF-SYCT               1979w52    2        1.179      1.826
     Citigroup Global Markets MBS/10-year Treasury yield spread                             LV                    M                                           SYMT-FCM10               1979w52    2        0.848      1.706
     Bond Market Association Municipal Swap/20-year Treasury yield spread                   LV                    W                                          SBMAS-FCM20               1989w27    2        0.818      1.480
     20-year Treasury/State \& Local Government 20-year General Obligation Bond             LV                    W                                           FSLB-FCM20                1971w1    2         0.502    -0.587         -2.143
     Moody's Baa corporate bond/10-year Treasury yield spread                               LV                    W                                           FBAA-FCM10                1971w1    2        0.348      1.097          1.897
     Total Money Market Mutual Fund Assets/Total Long-term Fund Assets                      LV                    M                                           ICMMA/ICIA               1974w52    2        0.231      0.217         -0.293
     Nonfinancial business debt Outstanding/GDP                                            DLN                    Q                                        XL14TCRE5/GDP               1971w13    2         0.025     0.105         -0.115
     Federal, state, and local debt Outstanding/GDP                                        DLN                    Q                                  (XL31CRE5+XL21CRE5)/GDP           1971w13    2        0.024      0.098         0.140
     Total MBS Issuance (Relative to 12-month MA)                                         LVMA                    M                                                 N/A                2000w52    2        -0.022    -0.108
     S\&P 500, NASDAQ, and NYSE Market Capitalization/GDP                                  DLN                    Q                            (SPSP5CAP+SPNYCAPH+SPNACAP)/GDP         1971w13    2        -0.041    -0.090         0.022
     New US Corporate Equity Issuance (Relative to 12-month MA)                           LVMA                    M                                              FNSIPS                1987w52    2        -0.047     0.005
     Wilshire 5000 Stock Price Index                                                       DLN                    M                                               SPWIE                 1971w5    2        -0.052    -0.149         0.026
     Loan Performance Home Price Index                                                     DLN                    M                                             USLPHPIS                1976w9    2        -0.066    -0.349         -0.137
     New State \& Local Government Debt Issues (Relative to 12-month MA)                    LV                    M                                               FNSIS                 2004w9    2        -0.108    -0.133
     MIT Center for Real Estate Transactions-Based Commercial Property Price Ind           DLN                    Q                                               MTBIP                1984w26    2        -0.111    -0.106
     Nonmortgage ABS Issuance (Relative to 12-month MA)                                   LVMA                    M                                                 N/A                2000w52    2        -0.130    -0.127
     S\&P 500, S\&P 500 mini, NASDAQ 100, NASDAQ mini Options and Futur                   DLNQ                    W                           COPSPMP+COPSP5P+COPNAMP+COPNASP          2000w12    2        -0.134     0.047
     CMBS Issuance (Relative to 12-month MA)                                              LVMA                    M                                                 N/A                1990w52    2        -0.157    -0.195
     New US Corporate Debt Issuance (Relative to 12-month MA)                             LVMA                    M                                              FNSIPB                1987w52    2        -0.179    -0.269
     Net Notional Value of Credit Derivatives                                              DLN                    W                                            D001TOTH                2008w45    2        -0.256    -0.474
     S\&P 500 Financials/S\&P 500 Price Index (Relative to 2-year MA)                     LVMA                    W                                        S5N40I/SPN5COM              1989w37    2        -1.860    -2.040
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Tightening Standards on Small C\&I Loans               LV                    Q                                               FTCIS                1990w13    3        2.501      1.591
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Increasing spreads on Small C\&I Loans                 LV                    Q                                                FSCIS               1990w13    3        2.467      1.471
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Tightening Standards on CRE Loans                      LV                    Q                                               FTCRE                1990w26    3        2.418      1.628
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Tightening Standards on Large C\&I Loans               LV                    Q                                               FTCIL                1990w13    3        2.416      1.513
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Increasing spreads on Large C\&I Loans                 LV                    Q                                               FSCIL                1990w13    3        2.364      1.314
     30-year Jumbo/Conforming fixed rate mortgage spread                                    LV                    W                                    ILMJNAVG*-ILM3NAVG*             1998w23    3        2.220      1.776
     Credit Derivatives Research Counterparty Risk Index                                    LV                    W                                              S000CRI                2006w1    3        1.361      0.859
     National Federation of Independent Business Survey: Credit Harder to Get               LV                    M                                              NFIB20                1973w44    3        1.228      0.779          0.368
     30-year Conforming Mortgage/10-year Treasury yield spread                              LV                    W                                            FCM-FCM10               1978w35    3        1.154      1.260         -0.574




                                                                               Table 2: Financial Indicators in the FCI
     (all of the financial indicators are in basis points or percentages)     LV: Level                                  1: Money Markets
                                                                              LVMA: Level relative to MA                 2: Debt/Equity Markets
                                                                              DLV: First Difference                      3: Banking System
                                                                              DLN: Log First Difference
                                                                              DLNQ: 13-week Log Difference


     Financial Indicator                                                             Transformation          Frequency                  Haver/Bloomberg*/Call Report^ Mnemonic                 Start Category Full Sample Post-1984 39-variable Index
     Ameican Bankers Association Value of Delinquent Home Equity Loans/Total L            DLV                    M                                     USHWODA                                1999w9    3        0.284      0.252
     Ameican Bankers Association Value of Delinquent Consumer Loans/Total Loa             DLV                    M                                     USSUMDA                                1999w9    3        0.264      0.235
     Ameican Bankers Association Value of Delinquent Credit Card Loans/Total Lo           DLV                    M                                     USBKCDA                                1999w9    3        0.220      0.176
     S\&P US Credit Card Quality Index 3-month Delinquency Rate                           DLV                    M                                      CCQID3                                1992w9    3         0.157     0.153
     Noncurrent/Total Loans at Commercial Banks                                           DLN                    Q                        (RCFD1407^+RCFD1403^)/RCFD2122^                    1984w26    3        0.139      0.138
     Ameican Bankers Association Value of Delinquent Non-card Revolving Credit            DLV                    M                                     USREVDA                                1999w9    3        0.139      0.140
     C\&I Loans/Total Assets                                                             DLNQ                    W                                   FABWCA/FAA                               1973w9    3        0.068      0.159         -0.415
     Mortgage Bankers Association Serious Delinquencies                                   DLV                    Q                                 USL14FA+USL149A                           1972w26    3        0.028      0.116          0.078
     Total Assets of Funding Corporations/GDP                                             DLN                    Q                                  OA50TAO5/GDP                             1971w13    3        0.022      0.076         -0.019
     Mortgage Bankers Association Mortgage Applications Volume Market Index               DLN                    W                                       MBAM                                 1990w2    3        0.020     -0.043
     Total Assets of Agency and GSE backed mortgage pools/GDP                             DLN                    Q                                  OA41MOR5/GDP                             1971w13    3        0.011      0.029         -0.069
     Total Assets of ABS issuers/GDP                                                      DLN                    Q                                  OA67TAO5/GDP                             1983w39    3         0.005    -0.004
     FDIC Volatile Bank Liabilities                                                       DLN                    Q        RCON2604^+RCFN2200^+RCFD2800^+MAX(RCFD2890^,RCFD3190^)+RCFD3548^   1978w26    3        0.000     -0.031         -0.052
     Deposits/Total Assets                                                               DLNQ                    W                                     FBDA/FAA                               1973w9    3        0.000     -0.091         0.083
     Fed funds and Reverse Repurchase Agreements w/ nonbanks and Interbank Lo            DLNQ                    W                             (FAIFFA+FABWORA)/FAA                           1973w9    3        -0.005    -0.105         -0.108
     Total Assets of Finance Companies/GDP                                                DLN                    Q                                  OA61TAO5/GDP                             1971w13    3        -0.009     0.009         -0.024
     Total Unused C\&I Loan Commitments/Total Assets                                      DLN                    Q                              RCON3423^/RCON2170^                          1984w26    3        -0.011    -0.019
     Total REIT Assets/GDP                                                                DLN                    Q                                  OA64TAO5/GDP                             1971w13    3        -0.012    -0.065         0.030
     Total Assets of Broker-dealers/GDP                                                   DLN                    Q                                  OA66TAO5/GDP                             1971w13    3        -0.013    -0.075         -0.007
     Real Estate Loans/Total Assets                                                      DLNQ                    W                                   FABWRA/FAA                               1973w9    3        -0.019    -0.100         -0.030
     Total Assets of Pension Funds/GDP                                                    DLN                    Q                                  OA57TAO5/GDP                             1971w13    3        -0.023    -0.072         0.006
     MZM Money Supply                                                                     DLN                    M                                       FMZM                                 1974w9    3        -0.028     0.060         0.102
     Total Assets of Insurance Companies/GDP                                              DLN                    Q                           (OA51TAO5+OA54TAO5)/GDP                         1971w13    3        -0.029    -0.054         0.053
     Commercial Bank 48-month New Car Loan/2-year Tteasury yield spread                    LV                    Q                                   FK48NC-FCM2                             1976w26    3        -0.033    -0.010         0.209
     Consumer Credit Outstanding                                                          DLN                    M                                        FOT                                 1971w5    3        -0.039    -0.063         -0.138
     Securities in Bank Credit/Total Assets                                              DLNQ                    W                                    FABYA/FAA                               1973w9    3        -0.052    -0.089         0.216
     Commercial Bank 24-month Personal Loan/2-year Treasury yield spread                   LV                    Q                                    FK24P-FCM2                             1976w26    3        -0.083    -0.073          0.218
     S\&P US Credit Card Quality Index Receivables Outstanding                            DLN                    M                                       CCQIO                                1992w9    3        -0.095    -0.022
     S\&P US Credit Card Quality Index Excess Rate Spread                                  LV                    M                                       CCQIX                                1992w5    3        -0.109    -0.193




26
     Finance Company Receivables Outstanding                                              DLN                    M                                       FROT                                1985w31    3        -0.149    -0.092
     Finance Company New Car Loan interest rate/2-year Treasury yield spread               LV                    M                                    FFINC-FCM2                             1976w26    3        -0.150     0.196         0.857
     Sr Loan Officer Opinion Survey: Willingness to Lend to Consumers                      LV                    Q                                       FWILL                               1971w13    3        -0.538    -1.085         0.926
     UM Household Survey: Auto Credit Conditions Good/Bad spread                           LV                    M                                        N/A                                 1978w5    3        -1.354    -1.178         1.948
     UM Household Survey: Mortgage Credit Conditions Good/Bad spread                       LV                    M                                        N/A                                 1978w5    3        -1.487    -1.619         2.033
     UM Household Survey: Durable Goods Credit Conditions Good/Bad spread                  LV                    M                                        N/A                                 1978w5    3        -1.543    -1.611          1.613
     National Association of Credit Managers Index                                         LV                    M                                        CMI                                 2002w9    3        -2.004    -1.374
                                                                 1973w2          January 11, 1973 Dow peaks above 1000 and then begins to decline ushering in 73‐74 "bear" market
                                                                 1973w19         May 11‐13, 1973 Bildenberg meeting to discuss developing pressures in "petrodollar" market
                                                                 1973w42         October 18, 1973 United States National Bank of San Diego declared insolvent, first billion dollar bank failure
                                                                 1973w44           October, 1973 Arab Oil Embargo begins, intensifying petrodollar market problems
          1973‐74 Bear Market, Petrodollar Recyling, and         1974w13             March, 1974 Oil embargo is lifted, but money center banks and REITS continue to experience problems
                      International Banking Crisis               1974w19            May 10, 1974 Regulatory agencies step in with financial assistance for Franklin National Bank
                               (1973‐1975)                       1974w23              June 8, 1974 Saudia Arabia agrees to keep price of oil denominated in US $
                                                                 1974w41        October 8‐9, 1974 Franklin National Bank collapses and is acquired by European American Bank
                                                                 1974w49        December 6, 1974 1973‐74 bear market ends with the Dow down 45%
                                                                 1975w3          January 19, 1975 Merger of Security National Bank of New York with Chemical National Bank to avoid failure
                                                                 1975w21            May 23, 1975 Regulatory agencies assist Bank of the Commonwealth to keep it afloat
                                                                 1978w31           August 1, 1978 Dollar begins steep decline against major foreign currencies
                                                                 1978w44        November 1, 1978 Carter announcement of a dollar defense program
                                                                 1978w51       December 17, 1978 OPEC decides to keep its US dollar reserves, but increase oil prices in 1979
                                                                 1980w11          March 14, 1980 Carter announcement of imposition of credit controls
                                                                 1980w13          March 26, 1980 Regulatory agencies step in with financial assistance for First Pennsylvania National Bank
     Dollar Crisis, Mutual Savings Bank Crisis, Penn Square, LDC 1980w27               July 3, 1980 Federal Reserve announces phase out of credit controls
                     Crisis, and Continental Illinois            1981w44        November 4, 1981 FDIC assists merger of Greenwich Savings Bank, first in a series of mutual savings bank assisted mergers
                               (1978‐1984)                       1982w27               July 5, 1982 Penn Square Bank fails
                                                                 1982w32          August 12, 1982 Mexico defaults on their debt, beginning of LDC crisis
                                                                 1982w45        November 8, 1982 Mexico and IMF reach accord on loan plan
                                                                 1984w19           May 9‐11,1984 Run on Continental Illinois begins, bank borrows $3.6 billion through discount window
                                                                 1984w27               July 1, 1984 Regulators develop plan to take over Contintental's bad loans
                                                                 1984w39      September 26, 1984 Resolution of Continental completed
                                                                 1986w52       December 31, 1986 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation becomes insolvent
                                                                 1987w42         October 19,1987 "Black Monday": DJIA ‐22.6%, SP500 ‐20.4%
              Savings & Loan Crisis and "Black Monday"
                                                                 1989w32           August 9, 1989 Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) signed into law
                               (1986‐1991)
                                                                 1989w35       September 1, 1989 Stock market returns to pre‐crash levels
                                                                 1991w12          March 23, 1991 RTC Funding Act of 1991 signed into law
                                                                 1997w27               July 2, 1997 Thai government announces a "managed float" of the baht, which devalued by 15%




27
                                                                 1997w32          August 11, 1997 IMF approves a stand‐by credit for Thailand
                                                                 1998w33          August 17, 1998 Russia defaults on its debt
                                                                 1998w38      September 23, 1998 Collapse of LTCM (Federal Reserve steps in with support to financial markets)
                                                                 1999w30             July 27, 1999 IMF approves stand‐by credit for Russian Federation
     Asian Financial Crisis, Russian Debt Default and LTCM, Y2K,
                                                                 1999w40          October 1, 1999 Fed establishes Century Date Change Special Liquidity Facility
          Dot‐com Bubble, 9/11, and Accounting Scandals
                                                                 2000w1           January 1, 2000 Y2K passes
                               (1997‐2002)
                                                                 2000w10          March 10, 2000 NASDAQ peaks then loses 31% of its value within 4 weeks and 50% within 6 months
                                                                 2001w37      September 11, 2001 Terrorist attack on the World Trade Center
                                                                 2001w50       December 13, 2001 SEC enforcement action against Enron
                                                                 2002w28             July 15, 2002 Arthur Anderson indicted
                                                                 2002w31             July 30, 2002 Sarbanes‐Oxley Act passed
                                                                 2007w31             July 31, 2007 Bear Stearns liquidates two hedge funds investing in MBS
                                                                 2008w11          March 14, 2008 Bear Stearns sold to JPMorgan Chase with NY Fed support
                                                                 2008w28          July 13‐15,2008 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac receive government assistance
                                                                 2008w36       September 7, 2008 FHFA places Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship
                                                                 2008w37   September 14‐16, 2008 Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy, AIG requires government assistance, Reserve Fund "breaks the buck"
         Subprime Mortgage Crisis and Subsequent Events          2008w40          October 3, 2008 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act passed (TARP)
                              (2007‐Current)                     2008w47      November 23, 2008 Citigroup requires government assistance
                                                                 2009w3          January 16, 2009 Bank of America requires government assistance
                                                                 2009w48        December 2, 2009 Bank of America announces plans to repay TARP assistance
                                                                 2009w49        December 9, 2009 TARP extended to Oct. 3 2010
                                                                 2009w50       December 14, 2009 Citigroup reaches agreement to repay TARP assistance
                                                                 2010w19          May 9‐10, 2010 EU, ECB, and IMF announce $1 trillion aid package after Greek debt crisis


                                                                           Table 2: Recent Crises in U.S. Financial History


                                           Table 3: Recent Crises in U.S. Financial History
                                                Number of Data Series in the FCI




28
             # of Data Series
     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                  0
                                      1970       1980           1990           2000   2010
                                                                Year



                                             Figure 1: Pattern of Data Availability
                                               Financial Conditions Indices
                       14
                              FCI
                              KCFSI
                       12     USMPFFCI


                       10


                        8


                        6


                        4




     std. dev. units




29
                        2


                        0


                       −2


                       −4

                            1975w1   1980w1           1990w1              2000w1           2010w1




                             Figure 2: Financial Conditions Index vs. USMPFFCI and KCFSI
                                      Short Sample Financial Conditions Indices
                        6
                            Initial
                            KCFSI
                        5


                        4


                        3


                        2


                        1




     std. dev. units
                        0




30
                       −1


                       −2


                       −3


                  −4
                 1990w1                               2000w1                      2010w1




                                        Figure 3: PCA-estimated Indexes
                                                            Unadjusted FCI
                       14
                              Full Sample
                              Post−1984 Sample
                       12


                       10


                        8


                        6


                        4




     std. dev. units




31
                        2


                        0


                       −2


                       −4

                            1975w1     1980w1                1990w1              2000w1   2010w1




                                                 Figure 4: Full Sample vs. Post-1984
                                 Variance Explained
                Full Sample                                   Post-1984




                                                       24%
                                  30%


      41%

                                                                                 49%




32
                                                       27%

                        29%




       Money Markets          Debt/Equity Markets   Money Markets         Debt/Equity Markets
       Banking System                               Banking System




     Figure 5: Decomposition of Variance Explained by the FCI
                                                     6WDELOLW\RIWKHFCI2YHU,QGLFDWRUV
                               39 vars
                         6     YDUV




                         4




                         2




     std. dev. units
                         0




33
                        −2




                        −4


                             1975w1       1980w1                 1990w1                2000w1   2010w1




                                                   Figure 6: 100 vs. 39-variable Indexes
                               A. Financial Conditions Index
      6

      4
                                                         FCI
      2                                                  Crisis Episodes

      0

     −2

           1975w1   1980w1    1985w1      1990w1     1995w1                2000w1   2005w1   2010w1



                                   B. Crisis State Probability
      1

     0.8

     0.6

     0.4

     0.2




34
      0
           1975w1   1980w1    1985w1      1990w1     1995w1                2000w1   2005w1   2010w1



                             C. 1 − Non−crisis State Probability
      1

     0.8

     0.6

     0.4

     0.2

      0
           1975w1   1980w1    1985w1      1990w1     1995w1                2000w1   2005w1   2010w1




                    Figure 7: Markov-Switching Model for the FCI
                                                         ROC curve: FCI
                      1


                     0.9


                     0.8


                     0.7


                     0.6


                     0.5                                                                  AUROC = 0.934




     True Positive
                     0.4




35
                     0.3


                     0.2


                     0.1


                       0   0.1        0.2      0.3     0.4        0.5         0.6   0.7       0.8         0.9   1
                                                             False Positive




                                 Figure 8: Receiver Operator Characteristics curve for the FCI
                               FCI and Threshold Rules
                                                         Crisis Episodes
                                                         FCI
      6
                                                         Emphasis on Crisis Episodes
                                                         Equal Weight
                                                         Emphasis on Non−crisis Episodes

      4




      2



                                                                                           Reactionary
      0
                                                                                           Unbiased




36
                                                                                           Pre−emptive




     −2




     −4


          1975w1   1980w1           1990w1               2000w1                    2010w1




                   Figure 9: Optimal ROC thresholds for the FCI
Working Paper Series
         A series of research studies on regional economic issues relating to the Seventh Federal
         Reserve District, and on financial and economic topics.

Risk Taking and the Quality of Informal Insurance: Gambling and Remittances in Thailand   WP-07-01
Douglas L. Miller and Anna L. Paulson

Fast Micro and Slow Macro: Can Aggregation Explain the Persistence of Inflation?          WP-07-02
Filippo Altissimo, Benoît Mojon, and Paolo Zaffaroni

Assessing a Decade of Interstate Bank Branching                                           WP-07-03
Christian Johnson and Tara Rice

Debit Card and Cash Usage: A Cross-Country Analysis                                       WP-07-04
Gene Amromin and Sujit Chakravorti

The Age of Reason: Financial Decisions Over the Lifecycle                                 WP-07-05
Sumit Agarwal, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson

Information Acquisition in Financial Markets: a Correction                                WP-07-06
Gadi Barlevy and Pietro Veronesi

Monetary Policy, Output Composition and the Great Moderation                              WP-07-07
Benoît Mojon

Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and Wealth                                             WP-07-08
Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi

Conflict of Interest and Certification in the U.S. IPO Market                             WP-07-09
Luca Benzoni and Carola Schenone

The Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates –
Evidence from Consumer Credit Data                                                        WP-07-10
Sumit Agarwal, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles

Portfolio Choice over the Life-Cycle when the Stock and Labor Markets are Cointegrated    WP-07-11
Luca Benzoni, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein

Nonparametric Analysis of Intergenerational Income Mobility                               WP-07-12
with Application to the United States
Debopam Bhattacharya and Bhashkar Mazumder

How the Credit Channel Works: Differentiating the Bank Lending Channel                    WP-07-13
and the Balance Sheet Channel
Lamont K. Black and Richard J. Rosen

Labor Market Transitions and Self-Employment                                              WP-07-14
Ellen R. Rissman

First-Time Home Buyers and Residential Investment Volatility                              WP-07-15
Jonas D.M. Fisher and Martin Gervais

                                                                                                     1
Working Paper Series (continued)
Establishments Dynamics and Matching Frictions in Classical Competitive Equilibrium      WP-07-16
Marcelo Veracierto

Technology’s Edge: The Educational Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction                WP-07-17
Lisa Barrow, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse

The Widow’s Offering: Inheritance, Family Structure, and the Charitable Gifts of Women   WP-07-18
Leslie McGranahan

Incomplete Information and the Timing to Adjust Labor: Evidence from the
Lead-Lag Relationship between Temporary Help Employment and Permanent Employment         WP-07-19
Sainan Jin, Yukako Ono, and Qinghua Zhang

A Conversation with 590 Nascent Entrepreneurs                                            WP-07-20
Jeffrey R. Campbell and Mariacristina De Nardi

Cyclical Dumping and US Antidumping Protection: 1980-2001                                WP-07-21
Meredith A. Crowley

Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment:
The Effect of Maternal Fasting During Pregnancy                                          WP-07-22
Douglas Almond and Bhashkar Mazumder

The Spending and Debt Response to Minimum Wage Hikes                                     WP-07-23
Daniel Aaronson, Sumit Agarwal, and Eric French

The Impact of Mexican Immigrants on U.S. Wage Structure                                  WP-07-24
Maude Toussaint-Comeau

A Leverage-based Model of Speculative Bubbles                                            WP-08-01
Gadi Barlevy

Displacement, Asymmetric Information and Heterogeneous Human Capital                     WP-08-02
Luojia Hu and Christopher Taber

BankCaR (Bank Capital-at-Risk): A credit risk model for US commercial bank charge-offs   WP-08-03
Jon Frye and Eduard Pelz

Bank Lending, Financing Constraints and SME Investment                                   WP-08-04
Santiago Carbó-Valverde, Francisco Rodríguez-Fernández, and Gregory F. Udell

Global Inflation                                                                         WP-08-05
Matteo Ciccarelli and Benoît Mojon

Scale and the Origins of Structural Change                                               WP-08-06
Francisco J. Buera and Joseph P. Kaboski

Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and Large Devaluations                                         WP-08-07
George Alessandria, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan
                                                                                                    2
Working Paper Series (continued)
School Vouchers and Student Achievement: Recent Evidence, Remaining Questions   WP-08-08
Cecilia Elena Rouse and Lisa Barrow

Does It Pay to Read Your Junk Mail? Evidence of the Effect of Advertising on
Home Equity Credit Choices                                                      WP-08-09
Sumit Agarwal and Brent W. Ambrose

The Choice between Arm’s-Length and Relationship Debt: Evidence from eLoans     WP-08-10
Sumit Agarwal and Robert Hauswald

Consumer Choice and Merchant Acceptance of Payment Media                        WP-08-11
Wilko Bolt and Sujit Chakravorti

Investment Shocks and Business Cycles                                           WP-08-12
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti

New Vehicle Characteristics and the Cost of the
Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard                                         WP-08-13
Thomas Klier and Joshua Linn

Realized Volatility                                                             WP-08-14
Torben G. Andersen and Luca Benzoni

Revenue Bubbles and Structural Deficits: What’s a state to do?                  WP-08-15
Richard Mattoon and Leslie McGranahan

The role of lenders in the home price boom                                      WP-08-16
Richard J. Rosen

Bank Crises and Investor Confidence                                             WP-08-17
Una Okonkwo Osili and Anna Paulson

Life Expectancy and Old Age Savings                                             WP-08-18
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones

Remittance Behavior among New U.S. Immigrants                                   WP-08-19
Katherine Meckel

Birth Cohort and the Black-White Achievement Gap:
The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth                                 WP-08-20
Kenneth Y. Chay, Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder

Public Investment and Budget Rules for State vs. Local Governments              WP-08-21
Marco Bassetto

Why Has Home Ownership Fallen Among the Young?                                  WP-09-01
Jonas D.M. Fisher and Martin Gervais

Why do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses                           WP-09-02
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones



                                                                                           3
Working Paper Series (continued)
Using Stock Returns to Identify Government Spending Shocks                         WP-09-03
Jonas D.M. Fisher and Ryan Peters

Stochastic Volatility                                                              WP-09-04
Torben G. Andersen and Luca Benzoni

The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply                         WP-09-05
Eric French and Jae Song

CEO Overconfidence and Dividend Policy                                             WP-09-06
Sanjay Deshmukh, Anand M. Goel, and Keith M. Howe

Do Financial Counseling Mandates Improve Mortgage Choice and Performance?          WP-09-07
Evidence from a Legislative Experiment
Sumit Agarwal,Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet,
and Douglas D. Evanoff

Perverse Incentives at the Banks? Evidence from a Natural Experiment               WP-09-08
Sumit Agarwal and Faye H. Wang

Pay for Percentile                                                                 WP-09-09
Gadi Barlevy and Derek Neal

The Life and Times of Nicolas Dutot                                                WP-09-10
François R. Velde

Regulating Two-Sided Markets: An Empirical Investigation                           WP-09-11
Santiago Carbó Valverde, Sujit Chakravorti, and Francisco Rodriguez Fernandez

The Case of the Undying Debt                                                       WP-09-12
François R. Velde

Paying for Performance: The Education Impacts of a Community College Scholarship
Program for Low-income Adults                                                      WP-09-13
Lisa Barrow, Lashawn Richburg-Hayes, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Thomas Brock

Establishments Dynamics, Vacancies and Unemployment: A Neoclassical Synthesis      WP-09-14
Marcelo Veracierto

The Price of Gasoline and the Demand for Fuel Economy:
Evidence from Monthly New Vehicles Sales Data                                      WP-09-15
Thomas Klier and Joshua Linn

Estimation of a Transformation Model with Truncation,
Interval Observation and Time-Varying Covariates                                   WP-09-16
Bo E. Honoré and Luojia Hu

Self-Enforcing Trade Agreements: Evidence from Antidumping Policy                  WP-09-17
Chad P. Bown and Meredith A. Crowley

Too much right can make a wrong: Setting the stage for the financial crisis        WP-09-18
Richard J. Rosen
                                                                                              4
Working Paper Series (continued)
Can Structural Small Open Economy Models Account
for the Influence of Foreign Disturbances?                                               WP-09-19
Alejandro Justiniano and Bruce Preston

Liquidity Constraints of the Middle Class                                                WP-09-20
Jeffrey R. Campbell and Zvi Hercowitz

Monetary Policy and Uncertainty in an Empirical Small Open Economy Model                 WP-09-21
Alejandro Justiniano and Bruce Preston

Firm boundaries and buyer-supplier match in market transaction:
IT system procurement of U.S. credit unions                                              WP-09-22
Yukako Ono and Junichi Suzuki

Health and the Savings of Insured Versus Uninsured, Working-Age Households in the U.S.   WP-09-23
Maude Toussaint-Comeau and Jonathan Hartley

The Economics of “Radiator Springs:” Industry Dynamics, Sunk Costs, and
Spatial Demand Shifts                                                                    WP-09-24
Jeffrey R. Campbell and Thomas N. Hubbard

On the Relationship between Mobility, Population Growth, and
Capital Spending in the United States                                                    WP-09-25
Marco Bassetto and Leslie McGranahan

The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on Black Achievement                                     WP-09-26
Daniel Aaronson and Bhashkar Mazumder

Comment on “Letting Different Views about Business Cycles Compete”                       WP-10-01
Jonas D.M. Fisher

Macroeconomic Implications of Agglomeration                                              WP-10-02
Morris A. Davis, Jonas D.M. Fisher and Toni M. Whited

Accounting for non-annuitization                                                         WP-10-03
Svetlana Pashchenko

Robustness and Macroeconomic Policy                                                      WP-10-04
Gadi Barlevy

Benefits of Relationship Banking: Evidence from Consumer Credit Markets                  WP-10-05
Sumit Agarwal, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles

The Effect of Sales Tax Holidays on Household Consumption Patterns                       WP-10-06
Nathan Marwell and Leslie McGranahan

Gathering Insights on the Forest from the Trees: A New Metric for Financial Conditions   WP-10-07
Scott Brave and R. Andrew Butters




                                                                                                    5
